

CHAP, I.

Can you speak Greek ?

No, certainly. Get you gone then.

And talk of stars, and firmaments, and firedrakes. Do you remember who was Adam’s schoolmaster. And who taught Eve to spin? She knows all these. And will run you all over the world As familiar as a fidler.—

Can you sit seven hours together and say nothing ? Which she will do, and when she speaks Speaks oracles ; speaks things that no man Understands ; no, nor herself either.

Beaumont and Fletcher.

THE sharp reproof of the pious and learned lady Magdelaine de Montmo-rell still shone in her keen eye, though it had ceased to murmur on her sullen lip. The little amanuensis received it in silence, hung her head, and sighed—she dared not weep. One solitary intrusive

VOL. I.

B

2

THE NOVICE OF

tear alone had escaped from her eye; and glittered on the glowing surface of her cheek, like the dew-drop which the power of repulsion scarcely suffers to embalm the bosom of the rose it spangles. The little amanuensis brushed it lightly off with the feather of her pen, and waited in patient silence till the inspiration of the lady Magdelaine should again command its efforts.

The lady Magdelaine had already spent four years in composing a voluminous History of the Crusades, whether foreign or domestic, against infidel or apostate, from the first institution of Peter the Hermit, in 1104, to the massacre of St. Bartholomew in 1572; of which last she had herself been a witness. She had retired from Paris to the chateau de Mont-morell, which rose on the northern skirts of the forest of Champagne, as a residence more appropriate to the pursuits of one who expected to unite the heathen reputation of an Anna de Commines with

ST. DOMINICK.

3

tlie holy fame of a Saint Geneviève: and solitude and a total sequestration from the world,, together with the convent-library of the Dominican sisters, (then rich in legendary lore and pious tradition,) gave boundless scope to the profound meditations of philosophy, and favoured the deep researches of his historian ; and while, with kindling ardour, fanaticism traced the recorded horrors of religious frenzy in the gloomy deeds of other times,” France still groaned under the struggling efforts of religious prejudice, or bled beneath the uplifted sword of civil dissension.

It was on the eve of St. Theodora the Martyr, and a few days after Henry the Fourth had invested Neufchatel, that a later hour than usual still found the lady Magdelaine in her study, dictating to her young secretary the most remarkable circumstances of the siege of Beziers, where six thousand obstinate heretics were put to the sword in cold blood, and four

4

TUE NOAICE OF

hundred committed to the flames, for the love of God. It was a note panegyrical and elucidatory on this instance of religious ardor, which had drawn from the horror-struck amanuensis (a young novice of the order of St, Dominick) such animadversions as seldom failed to elicit the disapprobation of her patroness, and to rouse every feeling of pious zeal into action. It was some time ere the lady Magdelaine could rally back that abstracted attention which the unanswerable, but not unreproved, comments of the little secretary had put to flight, À glance into a page of the seraphic doctor, St. Bonaventure, restored the train of her dissipated ideas; and, determined to finish her note with an animated apostrophe, she exultingly exclaimed, “ Oh !

fortunate though deluded creatures, rr who, by the pious zeal of your holy persecutors, w ere forced to return to ff the fold from whence you strayed !" And did they return, madam," inter-

ST. DOMINICK.

5

Vupted the novice, "to the faith they had "abjured?”—"They were all put to " death without distinction,” said the lady Magdelaine. " Kill away, cried " the bishop of Citeaux, God will take care of his own " Then what be-(f came of the bishop of Citeaux?” demanded the secretary.

The lady Magdelaine, again immersed in a learned puzzle, made no reply, but cast up her eye, pinched the folds of her ruff, and bit her nails, in the ineffectual endeavour to lure back the truant and felicitous thought which was to round the period of her apostrophe : and while the brain of learned dullness in vain gave the torture to exhausted memory, the vivid thought of genius darted through regions of impossibility, and pursued with ardor the glowing phantoms of fancy's creation. And thine was a genius, young Novice of St. Dominick, that soared far beyond the occupation allotted thee ; and thine was an age when the



TI1E NON ICE OF

mastery of the attention is seldom obtained; \yhen the mind will admit of an image, or embrace an idea wholly foreign from the pursuit in which it is engaged, when either steal on its apprehension under the glowing form of joys anticipated, or wxars the pensive, grateful semblance of joys elapsed : happy age !

The brain of the lady Magdelaine still pursued with unwearied diligence the learned trifle that distracted it, while the vagrant fancy of the little amanuensis wandered through scenes of fairy reflection. And never did a strain breathe in stronger unison to a soft and fanciful idea than that which stole on the rapt attention of the young secretary, as, tracing viewless characters with the feather of her pen, she

“ Gave to airy nothing A local habitation and a name.”

The storm raged loud, yet in every intervening pause the melodious tones of a

ST. DOMINICK.

7

harp were more distinctly heard. Panting and breathless, the novice arose, crept softly to the casement, raised herself on a small stool, and (lung an enquiring glance through its painted sash ; but the stained and narrow panes, lit up by the watery beams of the declining moon, gave no form to her eager eye, except that of an ancient dame of the family De Montmorell praying with sympathetic piety beside the faded figure of her lord in armour.

Yet if her eyes were ungratified by the sight of the musician, her ear more distinctly caught the strain, which at first faintly breathed at a distance, now lingered on every passing breeze, now directly ascended from the terrace beneath the casement, and now, gradually fading away, became lost amid the loud howling of the wind.

Rapt, entranced, the little amanuensis still remained at the casement, even long after the magic spell which had lured her

s

THE NOVICE OF

thither was dissolved; while fancy still fed her ear with those tones which distance or the storm had lulled into silence,, and amazement was busied in assigning a cause for an effect so singular, so delightful. But even fancy at last ceased to delude, and Imogen, with a sigh of disappointment, returned to her seat, at the moment when the lady Magdeiaine, starting from her’s, exclaimed, I must consult the bishop of Beauvais.”

Bid you not hear the sound of mu-sic, madam ?” demanded Imogen.— Music !” said the lady Magdeiaine, mechanically speaking the word with atone and air of abstraction that denoted the absence of lier mind, and her inattention to the demand.

To me it breathed no human sound,” added the amanuensis, ff but such as <f fancy gives to those aerial strains which fC waft the souls of dying saints to hea-‘f veil. In good sooth, it thrilled upon my heart ; e’en now methinks I hear

ST. DOMINICK.

9

<r it.”—“What?** demanded the lady Magdelaine, awakening. Hush! I am f<" not deceived. Yet methinks lis in the rf castle—it steals along the corridor; “ do you not hear it, madam?*'

The lady Magdelaine (whoseauricular faculties were someuÉt less acute than those other companion, now for the first time heard those strains which had awakened raptures beneath the steady tenor of her philosophic mind : they had indeed awakened emotions of a very different na-

•f

ture; and, advancing to a distant part of the chamber, she drew back a sliding door, which opened on the corridor that surrounded the servants’ hall. Thegrand-dame of the present lady De Montmorell had constructed this door for the purpose of obtaining secret information of all the politics of her domestic system. The lady Magdelaine, whose imagination was less on the qui vive than that of her young secretary, readily believed that these mysterious strains were not only of human

THE NOVICE OF

sound, but that they proceeded from some unlicensed merriment in her domestics ; and now appropriated the sliding-door to a purpose it had served for two generations back to the ladies De Montmorell. Instantly the tones of a harp, accompanied by a fine voice, interrupted by repeated and loud bursts of laughter, arose from the great hall below. Imogen, followed by the lady Magdelaine, sprung forward ; and, hanging over the balustrade, with a heart beating in unison to the lively air which had awakened its palpitation, observed the musician surrounded by a group, who paid the tribute of boisterous applause to the talents he exerted for their entertainment. Followed by the reluctant and delighted Imogen, the lady Magdelaine, with noiseless step, returned in silence to her study, closed the slide, and rung with some violence the little silver bell which lay on her table, but no ready page obeyed the summons. " Theodore may be asleep/'

ST. DOMINICK.

11

said Imogen timidly, contemplating the storm that gloomed the countenance of the lady Magdelaine, and threatened a temporary overthrow to her philosophy ; shall I go and awaken him, madam ?” The lady Magdelaine, in sullen silence, took a taper, and proceeded to the antichamber. Before the dying embers of a wood fire, stretched at his full length, lay the young page, who had read himself to sleep over the Romance of the Rose.— Why, thou mortal Morpheus !” exclaimed the lady Magdelaine in a Stentorian voice. The youth, roused by the well-known tone, started on his feet, rubbed his eyes, scratched his head, bowed, and stammered. Say,” continued his lady, wouldst thou emulate the drowsy powers ofEpimenides, and sleep away thy useless life?”—f<r So please, my lady, I thought”—You thought ! “ But every vassal now arrogates the di-f<r vine faculty of thinking. Bethink thee then of delivering my commands to

THE NOVICE OF

fr those rioters who by such rude wassai-lage disturb the nocturnal meditations of their lady.”

The ; rage, scarce half awakened, stood motionless and gaping. “Avaunt!” said the lady Magdelaine, “ and summon to “ my presence that hoary reveller, the “ sieur Ambrose.” The page, trembling, bowing, and yawning, went to seek the maître d'hotel ; and the lady Magdelaine returned to her study, «here [ nogen was still listening to those sounds winch found admittance through an aperture in the sliding-door. “ For twenty years,” said the lady Magdelaine, throwing herself into her chair, “ for twenty years the “ sound of ill-managed mirth, or rude “ merriment, has not been heard till this “ night within the walls of De Montmo-‘f rell !”—“I can well believe it,” sighed Imogen. “ I shall soon learn who this tf modern Orpheus is,” continued her ladyship.

“ So shall I, 1 hope,” said Imogen

ST. DOMINICK.

13

I should not wonder if it was a spy fr of that arch heretic, the king of Na-varre," exclaimed lady Magdelaine.

I should have no objection though it were/' thought Imogen.

The province is full of his emissaries fC and his troops/' said the lady Magdelaine.

Heaven prosper the hero in all his un-dertakings !” silently ejaculated Imogen.

The Leaguers/' added the lady Mag-delaine,, are dilatory in their operations ; while they should recollect, that during the Trojan wars, and those carried on “ by the Greeks against Darius and Xerxes—" Here the entrance of the maitre-d’hotel, followed by the greater part of the domestics of the chateau, interrupted the learned harangue of the lady* Magdelaine. The young page, peevish for having been awakened from a delicious dream, (which placed him first page of the presence to queen Margaret de

n

THE NOVICE OF

Valois,) in a manner not likely to reward him for the loss of so pleasing a delusion, and disappointed at having missed the entertainment he found his fellow-servants enjoying, delivered his lady's orders with such exaggerating additions of her displeasure, that old Ambrose, who dared not singly encounter her wrath, had prevailed on some of the domestics to share the punishment as they had shared the pleasure of the crime.

The appearance of the maître-d’hotel revived the sparks of anger which the digression of the lady Magdelaine from the king of Navarre to the Trojans, Greeks, and Persians, had nearly extinguished ; and, after a pause of a minute, she exclaimed, in a tone of reprehension and solemnity, "When the peaceful influence “ of Morpheus; so finely described by “ Homer, should spread the pinions of “ repose o’er the eyes of mortals, save " those spirits of higher order, who by “ the lamp’s pale beam pore over the in-

ST. DOMINICK.

15

<r spiration of departed genius, or raise amidst the silence of midnight gloomy monuments to perpetuate their own, cr say, what means this nocturnal was-sailage within the walls of the chateau de Montmorell ? It is to thee, thou hoary president of midnight revelry, I address myself/’—“I! good my lady,” stammered Ambrose ; " with my lady's “ good pleasure, the saints are witness, I ff never was a president : the Virgin for-bid I should ever be a president /' Say,” continued the lady Magde-laine, do you celebrate the orgies of the ff household gods, perform ye Bacchana-“ ban mysteries, or hold you the riotous “Saturnalia?” The servants, in silent and ignorant amazement, stared in each other’s faces. “ Speak,” continued the lady Magdelaine, “ who is this insidious “ promoter of midnight revelry, this Am-“ phion, this Terpander, who, like the " musicians of old, has charmed e’en “ stocks and stones ?”

THE NOTICE OF

“ So please, my lady/’ said Ambrose,, bowing, he is no trepanner, but a poor minstrel, a troubadour of Provence/' who erst-while begged shelter at the

O O

postern gate from the storm, in the name of our Lady of the Snow.— " Marry, an it had been a dog, one’s own " bowels would have yearned to turn “ him adrift o’ such a night.”

“Troubadour!" repeated the lady Magdelaine : “O thou second Cymon ! " thou more stupid than Polyphemus !

When heresy stalks abroad, and threa-c<” tens our holy faith with destruction ; te when anarchy and civil war tear the very bosom of our country, are we to cf admit into the very sanctum sanctorum “ of our cimteau every Hugonot spy who assumes the disguise of an itinerant vo-tarist of Apollo I This minstrel, this troubadour, may be the very spirit of

* “ A u sein de cette barbarie naquirent tu Provence nos premiers p- êt.s, connus sous le nom du Troubadour.” Histoire de iïùr.ce, Louis Jeune, ciiap. 7.

18

THE NOVICE OF

/

f<r with long and flowing beards/’—Ma-demoiselle, he has no more beard than r<r my hand, save indeed as handsome a pair of whiskers’'—As any cavalier in the province of Champagne might “ wish to wear/’ added Beatrice. Blind, forsooth ! Marry, if there is such ano-“ then* pair of black eyes in France, I'll (C give my silver reliquary for a copper (c sous !”

te Beatrice/’ said the lady Magde-laine, ffdost thou not fear the fate of Ca-nente, who was changed into a voice Ie for talking too much?”

She ! good my lady,” said Ambrose : rf beshrew me if she fears any thing, not excepting the devil, father Anselm, or your ladyship. I told the damsels it cf was not seemly to press round the youth as they did.”—Marry, didst thou so. Monsieur Propriety,” interrupted Beatrice; ce but did you consider then that cc it was so long since we saw any thing Ie young and handsome in the chateau.

ST. DOMINICK.

19

ff that we came to look at him, not as a man, but a wonder ?”—Beatrice,” said the lady Magdelaine, in a softened tone, it is easy to perceive you are not of the Pythagorean school; but—” “ She at school !” interrupted Ambrose; ff Mass ! she would corrupt a nunnery !” But the question is,” continued the lady Magdelaine, “ whether this musical Ado-nis should be dismissed, or retained a “ prisoner till the return of the father di-“ rector, who is gone to shrive the ladies of St. Dominick ?” — Poor dear “ souls !” exclaimed Beatrice, “ I won-der what they can have to confess, shut up all their lives in a convent : for my “ part, who only live in an old chateau, Cf a little sin goes a great way with me.” What if I were to see him myself?” said the lady Magdelaine, addressing Imogen. He is evidently insidious, and consequently dangerous : if he is, as I suspect, a spy,—yes, I w ill see him ; and let him, if he can, elude the

20

T*IE NOVICE OF

/

€t eve of Argus’ penetration ; yes, I will ff at least hear what he has to say.”— tr Say, my lady !” cried Beatrice; ff hear what hq has to sing. - Do, good my rf lady, get him to sing f the Merry <r Knight and the Maid in the Vestment tf of Blue,' Holy rosary ! 1 thought I “ should have split my sides with laugh-“ ing!’—■" Beatrice,’1 said the lady Mag-delaine mildly, f( sacrifice, I prythee, to (( the goddess Muta ; and thou, Ambrose, “ conduct this minstrel to my presence,” Ambrose retired with a bow of triumph ; the domestics exchanged looks of pleasurable amazement, and expectation flushed its beams in the bright eyes of Imogen. Theodore,” cried the lady Magdelaine, ff bring in fresh tapers.— Imogen, give me my veil. Beatrice, Blanche, and Agnes, retire to the back-u ground.” Then, having arranged her fardingale, settled the folds of her ruff, and adjusted her veil after the manner of Paulina, the emperor Nero’s mistress, she

ST. DOMINICK..

21

waited in an attitude of solemn dignity to receive her eleemosynary guest. In a few minutes be appeared, led in by Am-brose. lie bowed low, but not servilely; and, resting the end of his harp on his right foot, stood in an attitude rather dignified than humble.

His stature rose to that commanding Height which fancy attaches to the idea of majesty, and possessed that graceful slightness and flexibility which character rize youth in its first dawn of manhood. The contours of his face were conformable to the most perfect line of Roman beauty ; and the grand, the noble expression of his countenance evinced a soul where" no dark deed wandered in secret;’" it flashed the vivid emanations of genius, blended with the glowing affections of the man and the ardent spirit of the hero,*

* See the curious account of the appearance of a minstrel, who was introduced at Kenelworth castle, among many other devices and shows represented

22

THE NOVICE OF

His garb was that usually worn in those days by the professors of minstrelsy: a robe of dark green, gathered at the neck with a small gorget beneath the snowy folds of his ruff, and encircled round the waist with a crimson cadis girdle; the sleeves, slashed off from the elbow, fell to the ground, and discovered those of his doublet of black velvet, fastened at his wrist with silver clasps ; a scarlet ribbon fell from his neck, from which was suspended his harp, scarcely larger than a lyre; from his girdle hung a chain, to which was fastened a splendid escutcheon ; and his curling glossy black hair defined the form of a head which was that of a youthful Alcibiades.

The lady Magdelaine started, gazed, and remained for more than a minute lost in silent admiration of the form that presented itself at the door of her study.—

before queen Elizabeth, at an entertainment given her by Lord Leicester.

ST. DOMINICK.

23

Then, suddenly breaking into an abrupt exclamation, and resuming her air of awful deportment, she said, “ Speak, young “ stranger, whose garb and seeming tell u thee of that order fast falling to decay, “ whence and what art thou, who darest (C thus boldly to intrude at this unseason-“ able hour upon the peaceful security of “ our castle, and insidiously to practise on “ the simple ignorance of our domestics ?” “ Lady,” said the stranger, with a bow low and graceful, “ I meant not to in-“ trude, but to solicit; not to practise on i( ignorauce, but to interest humanity.” Who and what art thou ?” repeated the lady Magdelaine. “ By birth, lady, “ a Provençal, by profession a minstrel, by necessity a wanderer, and by senti-ft ment a citizen of the world. The ge-“ nius of my country found me, while <f yet a boy, tuning my rustic reed on the “ delicious banks of the Durance, and ct taught me to raise my humble lay, and “ emulate the bards of my native pro-

THE NOVICE OF

<c vince, who diffused the light of poetry “ and song o’er the wide dominions of “ France, then involved in Gothic dark-,c ness. I obeyed Thrice have I car* C( ried off the golden violet* at Thou louse “ from my competitors ; thrice have I <f crossed the Rhone, and sung through (c the wide domains of France the supe-riority of my native province, its meads f‘ for ever verdant, its purple vineyards, its fertilizing streams, and snowy flocks. (c I have raised a nobler strain, and sung the prowess of the warrior, the immor* tality of the hero; and erewhile, 0 “ dangerous theme! I have stolen inspi-i( ration from the eye of beauty, and sung

* In 1323 the society of Troubadours at Thou-Jouse sent circular letters to the Languedocian poets to come and read their woiks, with a promise of a golden violet to him who should compose the best romance, Clemence dTsaure left a sum by her will to be laid out in three golden violets, which the academy of Thoulouse was to dispose of as (lie reward of superior genius.

ST. DÔMINTCK.

2z

“ the charms of woman and the omnipo-4( tent power of love. This night the wandering spirit of my profession con-t{ ducted me to the forest de Montmorell, my better destiny to the portals of the ff castle, and (oh ! suffer me to hope it) my <f guardian angel into the presence of its “ fair and noble lady/'

The minstrel again bowed as he finished his recital; and the lady Magdelaine, with a contortion of the muscles that softened her harsh countenance into some faint indication of a smile, replied:

" Young stranger, I doubt not the ve-*€ racity of thy relation, although I do not pretend to possess the gift of that god* “ dess who could discover the most plau-" sible falsehood by a look. Neither am “ I ignorant of the reverence in which “ thy sacred profession was held by the “ ancients : the king Alcinous is described “ by Homer as paying the highest ho-“ nours to his inspired visitor; Ulysses, “ that wary chief, treated with profound VOL. I.	c

26

THE NOVIOE OF

“ respect the tuneful Dimodocus; the tc Athenians sent a minstrel to command “ the Spartans, who conquered under his <f inspiring influence; Anacreon was ca-ressed at the court of Potycrates, the <f tyrant of Samos ; and so great was the “ reverence paid by the ancient Arabs to <f their bards, that their entrance into the ■e cities was hailed with public rejoicings, “ and the best poet was rewarded with a “ rich robe, a fine horse, and a beautiful (< damsel.”

“ Oh, that I were an Arabian bard !” exclaimed the minstrel with naivete, and glancing his eyes to the back of lady Mag-delaine’s chair, where hovered the airy form of Imogen ; then, after a moment’s indulgence, he fixed his eloquent looks on the earth, and sighed.

The lady Magdelaine, who had arrested the impassioned glance half-way ere it had reached its point of destination, construed its expression according to the surmise of her vanity rather than her pride; and after a moment’s silence added :

ST. DOMINICK..

27

“ But, though I were not to acknow-<e ledge the claim thy inspired profession “ should always have on all true lovers of 4‘ the muses, yet the law of hospitality “ (never violated in the chateau de Mont-“ morell) would secure thee an asylum for “ a night such as this (which might have <{ served Virgil as a model for his cele-“ brated Storm;) else should I have read “ Eustatius to very little purpose, who “ treats so diffusely on the duties of hospi-es tality. I consign thee, therefore, young <f stranger, to the care of my maître “ d’hotel, and to-morrow thou shalt re-“ ceive an audience of leave/’ The minstrel pressed his right hand to his heart, and, with a bow of profound and grateful acknowledgment, was retiring, followed by the domestics; the door was fast closing, when, in a tone of hesitation, the lady Magdelaine exclaimed, C1 Yet stay, young “ stranger ; 1”—She paused ; the minstrel respectfully returned. “ I would '* know thy name,” said the lady Magde-

2S

THE NOVICE OF

laine. The minstrel hesitated, riveted his eyes on the head of his harp,, and, after a moment’s silence, eagerly replied, “ I am called Orlando, lady/’ et Bearest thou no other name?”

“ None, lady. A deserted foundling, “ my infant years were supported by the cs pastor of the village of Beauvoisin ; “ and my latter life was devoted to the “ monks of the Petits Augustins, whose “ flocks I tended on the banks of the Du-“ ranee.”

“ By the arms suspended from thy gir-“ die, thou hast filled some higher station ft than that of tending the flock of a con-" vent.”

“ True, lady ; I was for some time “ chief minstrel to the baron de Montar-“ gis, whose chateau is bathed with the “ blue waves of the Durance.”

fc Then thou served a heretic, and a “ rebel to a just cause.”

“ ’Tis true, lady; he denied the infalli-“ biiity of the pope, the omnipotence of

ST. DOMINICK,

29

t( the saints, and the justice of the claims “ of the Leaguers. *Tis some time since I " left him, in search of a better service.’* Which may fortune bless thee withal !” said the lady Magdelaine. “ Thou may’ft fe now retire.”

The minstrel obeyed.

And will you not, sweet my lady/’ said Beatrice, who with Agnes still loitered behind, will you not hear him play one little madrigal ? Marry, he u knows all the ballads of RoIIo, not to “ mention the tragic adventures of (he “ baron de Coucy and the fair lady de (i Yitry; and roundelays, sequidills, •and ec musettes, without end. else he is a youth Ci of no faith ; for all these did he promise “ me, in very truth ; besides the pleasant fc and curious tragedy, full of rare device, t( of the amorous shoemaker, who put “ himself to death with his own cutting-knife, all for love of a beautiful damsel “ of high degree. Do, sweet my lady, “ permit the minstrel to return ; the

30

THE NOVICE OF

te night is yeUyoung.”—“ Beatrice/’ said the lady Magdelaine, in a tone of hesitation, “ thou dost not consider it would be u unseemly for thy lady to hold further C£ converse with the young stranger.— Times are now greatly changed since % Charlotte of Savoy kissed the sleeping ei poet Alain Chartier, and was thought not the worse for it. It is not the man “ (said she) whom I kiss, but the lip <f from whence flowed so many charm-el ing strains.” — “ But then, dear my lady, kissing a man and listening to his tf song, marry, there is a huge difference !” “ Not to the eye of un impassioned phi-“ losophy, Beatrice ; for though 1 were “ to honour this young bard with a “ chaste salute, or lend an ear to his 4f inspired strains, it would still be but “ the homage of genius to its kindred “ spirit.*'

“ Then shall I call him back, lady?”

" No, Beatrice, not to-night; the taste-“ ful propensities of the poetess must not

ST. DOMINICK.

31

f‘ be indulged at the expence of the dig-“ nity of the lady de Montmorell.” .

“ Then with your ladyship’s good Ji-c‘ king. I’ll just step down and finish a “ courante I had begun with Bernardine “ when Theodore interrupted us. No “ one but a native of dear Provence can “ dance or play a courante after the right “ fashion. Marry, I could have thrown “ my arms around the neck of this same “ minstrel when he told me he was from f< Provence, had it not been for pure “ shame !”

c< Why, thou hast as little modesty as “ Lai's or Corinna,” exclaimed the lady Magdelaine angrily ; c< and were all my “ women of thy bold deportment, this “ poor youth might have shared the fate “ of Orpheus, who was torn to pieces by “ the Bacchantes.”

“ But, under your ladyship’s good fa-“ vor, if there be no difference between

“ a salute and a song”---

Peace!” said the lady Magdelaine

32

THE NOTICE OF

sternly; fr retire instantly to your apart-“ ment, nor violate by unseemly comport-<e ment the vestal propriety of thy lady’s “ household.”

Beatrice reluctantly obeyed, followed by Agnes, who, with less temerity to express her wishes than the archly-simple Beatrice, had not less propensity for courantes, madrigals, and roundelays.

Imogen in pensive silence still remained leaning on the back of the lady Magde-laine’s chair, lost in profound reverie; her arm supporting her fair head, the minstrel’s voice still murmuring on her ear, the minstrel’s glance still beaming on her eye, while the sigh which trembled on her lip expired unconscious ere she wras aware of its birth.

“ Imogen,” said the lady Magdelaine mildly. Imogen started, suddenly resumed her seat, and, catching up her pen, demanded if she should go on with the bishop of Citeaux and the siege of Beziers ?

ST. DOMINICK.

33

tf No,” said the lady Magdelaine, “ it “ is late—I am not disposed for composition ; the muses are not always propi-u tious to the midnight vigils of their vota-“ ries. I will read till I sooth my mind “ to rest, and thou may’st retire to thy tf apartment.”

<f What book shall I leave you, ma-fc dam ? Here are the Sufferings of the tf holy Martyr St. Lawrence, who was ie broiled on a gridiron.”

<f No, child, my feelings are not equal “ to that.”

et Here is the Martyrdom of St. Fran-f< cis, who carried his head a considerable “ distance after he had suffered decapita-“ tion.”

“ Nay, marry, that is still worse.”

“ Here are the Confessions of St. Au-gustine, and the Trials and Tempta-“ tions of St. Theodora.”

Poor St. Theodora ! Her’s were trials <f indeed ! What a holy struggle between “ her and St. Dydimus when condemned c 2

34

I

THE NOVICE OF

<e before the prefect of Alexandria ! And te what is that that lies at the foot of the _fc picture of St. Mary of Egypt ?”

'Tis an odd volume of Ovid.” cf Well, leave me that, and my rubric “ for vespers.” Imogen placed the books on the table, and, wishing her lady patroness a good night, retired to her solitary apartment.

The clock in the great hall had tolled out the first half-hour after midnight; the domestics had retired to rest; and Ambrose, the ancient maître-d’hotel, who loved an old story and old wine as well as any other maître-d’hotel in the province Of Champagne, was still entertaining the minstrel in the buttery with a flask of real muscade!, and an anecdote of the family de Montmorell, rather minute than interesting; when the minstrel, after a long pause, abruptly demanded, <f I prythee, “ good my friend, what fair vision was “ that which hovered near the chair of thy lady?” — “ What, my lady’s pet

ST. DOMINICK..

35

ff owl?” said Ambrose; nay, marry, fill “ thy glass, and thou shalt hear the whole ff history of it. It was the very same “ year that our late king Ilenry the Third, “ of blessed memory, was elected king of *' Poland, which I take it was about the

“ eve of”------

“ Nay, thou mistakest : I would know

who was the lovely maid that’’------

feIIa! ha! by the mass, thou hast a <f hawk’s eye. Monsieur Troubadour !— “ What, the demoiselle with the cocked-'f up nose, scarlet fardmgale, slop sleeves, <e and short petticoats, with a certain <l roundish look, and a laughing eye ? It <c was the demoiselle Beatrice ; and were l< my old dame Jacintha gone to heaven, <f and the damsel would cast but an eye “ of favor on your humble servant’’— “ Heavens!” exclaimed the minstrel impatiently, “ you still mistake me : the creature I mean is delicate even to fra-e( gility ; and there is a nymph-like sim-plicity in her form, an airy elegance in

36

THE NOVICE OF

€C lier figure, that might give a model to “ the Genius of Sculpture on which to <e rest his immortality. The very spirit <f of youth sheds its most touching graces “ around her ; and the look of playful “ gaiety that animates her countenance is “ softened by that air of ineffable modesty, rc which, like a transparent veil, height-" ens those beauties it would conceal.— “ Her dress is such as Fashion in her hap-tc piest caprice might adopt to render love-tc liness more lovely ; and though her robe lf of grey, her veil, and rosary, speak her ie a novice of some holy order, yet Love, ff lurking in the dimple her arch smile “ creates, seems to reclaim the sweet apos-" tate as his own !”

Pardie, well done. Sir Minstrel!— “ Mass, an T would not as soon hear thee *r as my lady herself, when she talks about “ the gods and goddesses, and nobody un-“ derstands a word she says, save the fa-“ ther director and mademoiselle Imo-,f gep.J’



ST. DOMINICK.

37

cc Imogen ! is that her name ?”

In good sooth is it. So, nothing will * serve your dainty taste but our young " nun !”

A nun !”

That is to be.”

<<r And from choice, sayest thou ?” rc Nay, by the rosary, I doubt if her tr vocation lies much that way. Poor “ soul ! somehow she does not take kindly <f to vigils and fastings, for which she and “ the father director have some disputes, and in which she always gets the upper ci hand, and that with so laughing a face, that you would think she was in very " sport. For when once she gets loose from my lady’s study she is as blithe as ff May ; and then for charity, I’ll set her up against all the ladies of St. Domi-“ nick, with my lady and the father di-‘f rector to boot.”

ff And are her means equal to her vir-tuous propensities ?”

38	THE	NOVICE	OF

“ Marry, no, and more’s the pity ! She “ has nota sous but as she earns it by her (C embroidery, which I sell for her at the <c next market-town, when I go for pro-visions; and then away with the money “ to the poor serfs who live on the skirts s< of the forest, and have been ruined by se the civil wars : and yet many a late “ hour does she sit up to do this, after writing all day for my lady. ‘ My good '£ Ambrose,’ will she say, (with such a ff sweet begging face !) ‘ shall I coax “ thee for a taper to-night, and in good " sooth I will not speedily trouble thee ff again ?’ The saints bless her for a Cf sweet one ! It were the pity of pities to make a nun of her."

“ Is she related to thy lady ?” demanded the minstrel.

“ No truly, poor soul! I wot she ne-tf ver had a relation : it is thought she fe was a present from St. Dominick to the " ladies of our convent.**



ST. DOMINICK.

39

cf He must have been a saint of very rf little taste, or very great generosity, to ec part with such an object."

Marry, I warrant, hadst thou been “ St. Dominick, thou wouldst have been less generous. Ah! thou art a wag in “ grain. Sir Minstrel. Yet the saint did ff not part with her altogether; for when <f she was found by the portress at the wheel, though a coarse veil was what “ the saint had covered her withal, yet “ round her little neck was hung an agate ^ cross, bearing the letters St. D, ; which <e proved to the ladies of St. Dominick, '* as plain as their own great spire, that the saint meant to keep her all to him-(< self. She had just entered her noviti-<e ate, when my lady begged her of the e< sisterhood to write for her ; for the de-“ moiselle Imogen is a rare clerk, and my “ lady is writing a history of how the “ saints used to kill and burn the folk in former times, for the good of their souls, and to save them the expence of

40

THE NOVICE OF

cs buying indulgences. Hark! there goes <c old Tell-truth ; pardie, another quar-" ter, and we shall be on the second cock-crow. Come, Monsieur Minstrel, I “ pledge you in our last glass of musca-“ del/* Ambrose then arose, and conducted the stranger to the apartment allotted him.

ST. DOMINICK.

41

CHAP. II.

“ Mangled peace 1 Dear nurse of arts, plenty, and joyful births!

Alas ! she has from France too long been chas’d ; And all her husbandry doth lie in heaps.

Corrupting in its own fertility.’*

Shakespeare.

FOR thirty years Catherine de Media's governed France, under the nominal sovereignty of her three sons, Francis IÏ. Charles IX. and Henry III.

11 faut diviser 'pour regner” was the darling maxim by which the wily Catherine directed her political life ; and the increasing influence of the Hugonots, in the reign of her son Charles, animated her to the most refined practice of her favorite theory, and afforded to the artful and ambitious queen-mother a pretext for fomenting those dissensions and perpétua-

THE NOVICE OF

ting those feuds, by which she hoped to undermine or subdue a faction which daily became more formidable and more dangerous.

Astrologers had foretold that her sons would die without issue, and that the diadem of France would encircle the brow of a prince of the line of Bourbon. Even the strong mind of Catherine was not proof against these impositions, which the dark credulity of the age received with implicit confidence, and sanctioned with the profoundest reverence. It was therefore little to be wondered at that the young Henry of Bourbon, king of Navarre, (of the blood royal of France, and the idol chief of the Hugonots,) became at once the object of her detestation and her dread ; yet, by one of those profound strokes of policy which distinguished her reign, she offered him in marriage her lovely and accomplished daughter, Margaret de Valois ; and, by this extraordinary proposal, dissipated the Hugonot reserve.

ST. DOMINICK.

43

and gave an animated flow to the genial current of open-hearted confidence.

Although Henry embraced the proffered alliance,, love had no share in this acceptance : his heart submitted to the tyranny of prudence, and his inclinations became a sacrifice to the wishes of his party, which was ilaUered in the hope that this union would disseminate peace to France, and give to eternal oblivion the religious and political factions of her children. The llugonots, in the ardor of their hearts, dazzled by the splendid promises of Catherine and her son, crowded to the capital, where magnificent preparations were already made for the nuptials of (he king of Navarre; and, bewildered by the pleasures, and intoxicated by the alluring enjoyments, of the most voluptuous court in Europe, the unsuspecting victims of the cruel policy of the queen slumbered over the dangers by which they were secretly surrounded ; and, revelling in the fair illusions of the present, che-

44

THE NOVICE OF

rished no suspicion of the brooding; evils of the future.

On the 18th of August, 1572, all Paris resounded to the lively acclamations of joy, happiness, and festivity ; for it was the wedding-day of the king of Navarre and the princess de Valois. On the 24th of August, 1572, all France re-echoed the groans of the slaughtered Hugonots, for it was the ?nassacre of St. Bartholo-lew ! History has enrolled in her annals the sanguinary transactions of this day with dreadful exactitude; but the sye, the heart, will eagerly pass over a recital of those horrid deeds, which even in perusal blanch the glowing cheek of humanity, and surpass in reality the fancied atrocities which the most depraved and sanguinary imaginations could devise.

Catherine, who possessed herself neither the religion of prejudice nor of truth, rendered the fanaticism of the times subservient to her policy ; and instigated her jealous and deluded adherents to a mas-

ST. DOMINICK.

45

sacre, which was executed under all the aggravating circumstances that religious fury, private pique, or public animosity, could devise. The young king of Navarre found a comparative safety in flight ; Charles and his mother triumphed in their execrable machinations; and France,Tor twenty-six successive years, groaned under the complicated woes which the transactions of one day engendered.

Charles survived the massacre of St. Bartholomew but two years ; and his brother Henry III. became the successor to that ff barren sceptre’* with which Catherine amused the puerile minds of her sons, while she still retained the reins of government in her own hand.

It was at this period that a dangerous confederation arose in France, known by the naiqe of the League. Its leaders were of the house of Guise ; its pretence the defence of the church ; and its secret motive the subversion of the state. But

46

THE NOVICE OF

that profound system of dissimulation which formed the soul of Italian politics, and which Catherine had imbibed with the principles of her idol Machiavel, served her in the most critical period of her life, and induced her to declare for the League, which she dreaded, and to unite herself to the Guises, whom she abhorred. Opposed, therefore, to the associated powers of the court and the League, stood the young king of Navarre : the hero of a little army of heroes ; and, as he himself pleasantly expressed it, “a king without “ a kingdom,* a husband without a wife, “and a warrior without supplies.” Such was the situation of this magnanimous prince, whose character scarcely “ smelt of mortality who, having conquered

* Spain had usurped the kingdom of Navarre from his father; and he continued to hold his miniature court at Bearn, the place of his nativity.

Vide Pcrijix, Histoire de Henri le Grand.

48

THJE NOVICE OF

brave Crillon, whose valour bestowed on him the epithet La Noiie, to whose generous virtues even his enemies paid the homage of esteem ; with many others scarcely less deserving of notice, though less fortunate in obtaining it, composed a little flying camp, of which Henry was himself the soul. Alternately the vanquished and the victor; consenting to interviews with the queen-mother, productive of no decisive effect ; now openly meeting her forces in the field ; and now signing truces, no sooner formed than violated ; this gallant prince still continued to support the vicissitudes of his destiliy with firmness and heroism.

Meanwhile the powers of the League, and the influence of the Leaguers, increased with hourly extent: it was believed by the royal party, that the designs of the ambitious Duke de Guise were to dethrone the king,* and already was the

* Henry III.

ST. DOMINICK.

49

«lake's destruction determined on by Henrv and bis mother.

That popularity which the insinuating virtues and dazzling talents of de Guise had obtained, the amazing power he was endowed with, and the circumstance of the times, rendered a public process equally dangerous and difficult. Assassination was more consonant to the political prudence and cherished vengeance of Catherine; and the duke de Guise was murdered in the royal apartments (whither his unsuspecting confidence had led him) by the king’s guards.

His death produced universal commo' tion. Ail Paris was animated by ungovernable fury ! The duke de Mayenne,1 brother to the murdered de Guise, was declared his successor as chief of the League; and Catherine survived the victim of her barbarous policy but a short time.

The king of France, naturally imbecile, whose conversation was that of a capu-D

SO

THE NOVICE Of

chin, and whose life was that of a professed debauchee, vainly endeavoured to win the duke de Mayenne to his interest by the most splendid offers; and shrinking beneath those fatal circumstances which endangered his life and crown, he sought alliance with the king of Navarre, as a dernier resort That careless and unguarded confidence, which formed so prominent a trait in the noble character of the gallant Henry, and which experienced treacheries had not chilled, led him to accede to the proposal ; and the two kings met near Tours, embraced with fraternal tenderness and vowed mutual enmity to the League,

This transaction was shortly after foN lowed by the death of the king of France, viho was assassinated by a young fanatic monk of the order of St. Dominick ; and Henry do Botrhou (who united in his person the three races of the French kings,) as lawful heir to the dominions of Franco, ascended its throne, and assumed tho title

ST. DOMINICK,

M

of Henry IV. King of France and Navarre; and thus fulfilled the prediction of the astrological sybil, whose prophetic declarations had first rendered him the object of that hatred and persecution with which Catherine de Medicis pursued him through the most precious years of his existence.

France could not desire a master more worthy of governing her; more capable or more anxious to repair the losses she had sustained, and to restore her to that peace and unity, happiness and prosperity, which her own anarchical and vague commotions had forfeited. Yet still the greater part of her volatile children, blinded by party prejudices, or influenced by religious fanaticism, opposed his accession to the throne of his ancestors ; and considered, or ai least pleaded, his religion as an insurmountable barrier to his elevation : and as the Leaguers possessed an army four times more numerous than that which surrounded the royal standard, the horrors of. civil war still continued to spread de-

52

THE NOVICE OF

Vastation through some of the finest provinces in the kingdom.

Still opposed, and still unsubdued; tempering the most dauntless valour with moderation, the most heroic courage with humanity; the royal Henry appeared a being of more than mortal power, of more than human virtue: living in the midst of his troops ; sharing their toils while he rewarded their efforts ; animating them by the inspiring gaity of his air, while he provided for their safety ; and flattering them by cheerful presages of success, which his example taught them to deserve, and his genius seemed almost created to command. The celebrated battles of Argues, Yvri, and Aumale, have enrolled the name of the hero high on the records of immortality ; and, after having performed deeds of almost supernatural heroism before the walls of Rouen, he was necessitated to raise the siege, and marched from thence to the investment of Neufcliatel. It was in the interval between this period

ST. DOMINICK.

53

and the siege of Epernai, that the young minstrel of Provence appeared before the portals of the chateau de Montmorell.

CHAP. III.

When ye dispel the train

That waits on beauty, then religion blows

Her trumpet, and invites another circle:

Which, full as false at the preceding crew.

Flatter her problematic mental charms.

While snuihng incense ; and, devoutly wanton. The pagan goddess grows a Christian saint.

And keeps her habit of divinity.

Walpole.

How far beyond The praise of mortals may th’ eternal growth Of nature to perfection half divine Expand the blooming soul !

A KI NSIDE.

“ THE age is barbarous/1 said the lady Magdelaine, as'she returned one morning from the gay and splendid court at Catherine de Medicis, “ and the courtiers are "all Goths and Vandals/1

54	THE NOTICE Or

The lady Magdelaine was then at that critical period of female existence, when the ebb and flow of youth and beauty are under the influence of a retrograde motion, She had attained lier thirty-second year, and was unmarried; she had gone to court that day, habited in Eastern splendour, and was neglected ; which accounted for the barbarism of the age, and the Vandalism of the courtiers.

Nature had been a mere step-mother to the lady Magdelaine. She was considered as a moveable basso-relievo to the animated beauties of Catherine's court ; yet unhappily the lady Magdelaine had an exhaustless passion for notoriety, in a situation in which the enchantment oflove* iiness, or the attraction of the Graces, alone could secure it to woman. Time continued to increase the vivacity of his assaults till the last cowardly charm of youth retreated, and obliged the lady Magdelaine to change her plan of operation. “ I will reform the age/’ said lady

ST. DG>il>îiC!t.

55

Magdelaine, " reform it altogether and accordingly slie patronized Baif, corresponded with Montaigne, took Jane of Bourbon, wife of Charles IX., as her model, and determined on making a new translation of Pliny, in opposition to the learned duchess of Burgundy ; but pedantry without genius, and learning without taste, only rendered her the but of fashionable derision to ail Paris.

*f The world/' said the lady Mngdc-laine, f{ is not only buried in the profound ff ignorance of the middle ages, but im-" merged in the atheistical darkness of €i antiquity !'* And, accordingly, the lady Magdelainc, by ‘ a transmutation rare/ descended from her philosophic stilts to perform the bare-footed pilgrimage of humble Christianity.

But religion was not just then the fashion at Paris; and the lady Magde-laine, under the persuasive influence of her father director, a brother of the Cistercian order, retired to her chateau in

56

TH B NOVICE OF

Champagne, (of which the death of her only brother had put her in possession,) to work out her salvation, to found a monastery, and compose the History of the Crusades; a work equally compatible with her talents as an authoress, and her sentiments as a devotee.

To father Anselm was consigned the superintendance of that holy pile which was to immortalize her piety, as her work, she believed, would her erudition ; while every nerve of the father was stimulated to exertion by the hope of becoming the head of that structure he reared. Along each half-finished aisle, and on every rising cloister. Interest hung the tempting lure of an abbots cowl. Never did a building proceed more rapidly—it seemed a work of magic. For father Anselm ‘ had ‘ views on ihis side heaven/ which gave the wing of expedition to every etfort.

Not so the learned labors of the lady Magdelaine : they seemed to increase in an inverse ratio with the exertions she

ST. DOMINICK.

b7

made to complete them ; they were indeed of E<rean magnitude. A total want

o	“

of connection, a strong* instinctive propensity to anachronism, a multiplicity of crude details, and a crowd of too obvious plagiarisms, reduced the bewildered brain of lady Magdelaine to the ne plus ultra of authorship ; but then the whole fault lay in the want of an amanuensis !

<f I think, father,” said she to the director, fr you could find me out some young “ brother of your own order, who could “ at once officiate as almoner and secre-“ tary ; who could write a fair hand, and <f know enough of Latio to transcribe with “ accuracy from the fathers.”

<c A young brother of my order !” reiterated the astonished father. The request struck on the very nerve where a thousand little selfish interests lay in embryo. cc Why cannot I oiler myself?” thought the priest: but then, independent of his superintendancc of the monastery, he was watching the fall of a cloisteral priorship; d 2

TII2 NOTICE OF

in a neighbouring1 convent. He had been lately installed in the dignities of the confessional of the ladies of St. Dominick, and held not only the spiritualities, but the temporalities, of the lady Magdelaine in sacred trust. " My labors are indeed great,” said the fatlier. f* So are your f£ profits,” whispered Interest. " No/* said the father, “ no competitorship with *c me, even with a brother of my own or-Cf der! Yet, if she must have an amanu-‘f ensis, why she shall ;—but, marry, I c bar the young Cistercian; no, it shall be ff the little Imogen of St. Dominick.” When St. Dominick had procured the sanction of pope Honorius III. to found a convent for nuns, lie had, with benevolent gallantry, inserted a clause in the rules, that the sisters were to receive and educate such young daughters of misery as the guardian spirit of innocence in distress should lure to their sacred portals. Among the little victims of misfortune thus received and admitted into the lay

ST. DOMINICK.

59

sisterhood was one who had been taken at the wheel when an infant. They called her Imogen, for such was the name carved on the little cross suspended from her neck ; and dedicated her to St. Dominick, for on the reverse of the cross were marked the initials St. D. ; on her left cheek was a mark.

The lady abbess had heard that St. Theresa had just such another. The nuns looked wise, and saw a mystery in this coincidence, all but the minor canoness; she was perpetually tearing to pieces the sybil leaves of holy enigma ; but the nuns knew it was not the faith of the canoness that obtained her elevation.

The little Imogen, while yet a child, distinguished herself by a pit tv surpassing belief. Her canonization was already in prospect added to the convent’s holy records ; and the lady abbess was cried up as a prophetess. An old friar (predecessor in the confessional to father Anselm) had taught her to write. He did more :?

60

THE NOVICE OF

he taught her as much Latin as enabled her to read some of the fathers, who had not written merely to show their philological talents, or their knowledge of the recondite branches of lanofua^e.

o o

At thirteen she had not only read the works of the angelic doctor St. Gregory the Naziantine, but could repeat the various arguments advanced in those long disputes which existed between the Capuchins and the Dominicans, on the reality of the wounds of St. Francis, and the orthodox cut of a monastic cowl. “ It is a “ second St. Theresa,” said the nuns 5 and the blush of gratified ambition crimsoned the cheek of the meek-eyed novice. The St. Theresa was the standard of attainment which youthful emulation had erected in her bosom > and she affected to imitate the life, as she resembled the person and manner, of her idol saint.

The fragile delicacy of her form, the native enthusiasm of her disposition, her propensity to study, and the nature of

ST. DOMINICK.

61

those studies, all assisted to render her a fanatic, and disposed her to receive the inspirations of fancy as existing forms, dud

the bright illusions of a "jowins: imaginais	O	o	o

tion as real substance. Already the little saint had her extacies, her raptures, and her visions. Yet was her mind strong and comprehensive ; but, deprived of all subjects of discussion or inquiry, save what the dull repetition of convent bigotry afforded, she had not the power of rectifying the aberrations of reason by the observations of experience, or the benefit of a liberal intercourse.

The nuns of St. Dominick were divided with respect to this prodigy : the younger sisters hated her for her superiority, the elder cherished her as a saint in embryo. Sister Pasiphae, the minor canoness, stood alone: she neither hated nor cherished; she admired her talents, derided her fanaticism, and pitied her delusion.

"Artthou determined on being a saint?’' said she one morning, returning from matins with the novice.

THE NOVICE OF

“ Not if I can be more than saint \ * said the novice with fire.

“ Thou art ambitious/* said the nun, “ and ambition is not the virtue of a saint/* “ Then it is a virtue?” said the novice eagerly.

What wouldest thou wish to be, wert tc thou in the world ?” said (he minor ca-noness, evading her question

“ In the world !” quickly repeated the novice, her whole face suffused with crimson. In the world I would not be any fC thing 1 have ever heard of—I would be “ more : but,” she added with a sigh, “ I shall never leave tins convent, and here “ I can only be an abbess and a saint/’ The minor canoness had long been in a consumption. She complained of weakness, and for the first time passed her.arm through that of the young novice: the novice bent her fair head, and pressed her lips to the hand that rested on her’s, in acknowledgment for the condescension.

“ Goto,” said the canoness, <f thou art

ST. DOMINICK.

63

“ dangerous: I would not love thee if i r* could, for thou art (she shuddered as she spoke) a fanatic !”

“ I would be a saint,” said the novice with simplicity.

<f Thou hadst better be a Christian/’ said the canoness.

“ Teach me then to become one/’ said the novice, with a glance of irresistible insinuation. From that moment the minor canoness and the novice of St. Dominick were inseparable.

Such was the person fixed on by the father director as the amanuensis to lady Magdelaine.

The abbess is deceived in this child/’ said he. “ She is pious, all-believing, and “ understands a little Latin, but she is no genius; for never did a confessional “ echo to such a ridiculous list of pecca-dilloes as those she avowed yesterday: the simplicity of her questions would “ puzzle a conclave to answer. She has “ entered her noviciate, ’tis true ; but that “ can be put off for a time.”

64

THE NOVICE OF

The lady Magdelaine consented reluctantly to change the young brother of the Cistercian order for the young novice of St. Dominick; and the abbess, well aware of the advantage of placing a member of her society about the person of one of the richest devotees in France, readily consented to the putting off her profession till the lady Magdelaine should have finished her Crusades.

The novice learnt her intended translation from the convent to the chateau with an obvious transport, rather inimical to the demure sobriety of her vocation. On her knees she received a little silver reliquary from the abbess, enclosing a few grains of the sacred brick-dust scraped from the wall of the Santa Casa of Lo-retto ; and promised to come every Sunday to perform her devotions at the convent. <e I give thee this precious relic,” said the abbess, “asa holy spell against the temp-“ tations of a wicked world.” The novice kissed it devoutly, and sprang on her

ST. DOMINIC*.

55

feet with a playful levity not altogether appropriate to the pious exordium addressed to her Yet as she seated herself in lady Maaxlelainc’s litter, and waved

J	O	1

the end of her veil to the nuns who stood in crowds at the chancel window, she wiped away one tear with her girdle, and received another on her lip, half closing in a soft adieu ! Rut it was from an eye as sparkling as Euphrosyne ever betrayed in her archest moments; it was on a lip as smiling as fancy ever gave to the cherub mouth of Hebe.

Imogen cast one glance at the gloomy and sequestered pile she had left; then flung another into the gay perspective that burst on her view. She bounded from her seat; her cheek flushed, her heart throbbed, every nerve was in a state of rapturous irritation. The world was nevr to her, and she was but sixteen !

Imogen was really so ignorant of Latin, or her change of situation had so much increased the native vivacity of her dispo-

66

THË NOVICE ÙŸ

fcîtion,, that, far from assisting the lady Magdelaine, she confused and entangled every thing. She made false transcripts, and worse translations; the fathers were made to utter nonsense, and the saints to speak with the levity of mortals The lady Magdelaine was enraged ; the director trembled for the return of the young Cistercian, and undertook not only to instruct the young amanuenpU in the duties of her situation, but to assist her in her classic studies

Imogen's thirst for instruction was insatiate. She received with avidity the lestons of her holy preceptor : and in a few months had not only conquered all the difficulties of the Latin tongue, but, mistress of its idiomatic delicacies, was able to detect the inelegances of the fathers, and did it with a freedom that in the eyes of the pious bordered on profanation.

The literary pursuits of the lady Magdelaine were litcrallg lucubrations; for she rose.late, and spent her mornings in

ST, DOMINICK.

ftî

her orator}", chapel, or tapestry-room.-*— The greater part of the day was consequently at Imogen’s disposal, and she passed it in the library of the chateau.—* The late lord de Montmofell was a man of letters : he lived and died in the midst of his books, and left to his learned sister the best private library in Prance. The studies of the young novice had hitherto been confined to the Golden Legend, the Livci of the Martyrs, and the works of St. Gregory the Naziantine; but now a new world broke upon a mind replete with native intelligence ; endowed with that insatiate desire of information which marki the nobler faculties of the soul, and enriched with that versatility of talent» which is the distinguishing characteristic of genius,

From this mental regeneration, she cast a retrospective glance on the nature of her past studies ; and felt like the being who, born unblessed with the precious sense of sight, in the first period of aw a-

THE NOVICE OF

kened vision, flings his rapt eye on the glories of the creation, wonders, and adores.

Poor saint Gregory was the first who felt the effect of this intellectual revolution ; and departed, with his pious phalanx, before the victorious arms of the two Plinys: a few verses of the elegant Tibullus were equal to the defeat of the sixty-two decades of saint Ely the Angelic: Plutarch’s heroes overthrew the Golden Legend ; and one book of Virgil completed the conquest of the whole army of martyrs ! She had once thought there was nothing to be learnt out of her convent ; and she now thought there was nothing to learn in it that would not disgrace the credulity of childhood: the influence of knowledge, operating on genius, gave wing to thought; and reflection, bursting from the thraldom of prejudice and error, pointed its soaring flight towards the bosom of truth. Those mystical refinements which disfigure the purity and beauty of true re-

ST. DOMINICK.

69

ligion ; those logical subtleties which set common forms at defiance ; those improbable legends, the wild offspring of disordered imagination or pious fraud; now appeared to her as they were, equally foreign to religion of morality, and frequently subversive to both. If I am to be a saint,” said Imogen, I will be the “ foundress of my own sect. I will not seek for my religion in books, and mo-“ dify it into systems, for I feel its essence in my soul ; nor shall it be to me as the “ avenging angel of dreadful retribution, but the spirit of peace, of love, of bliss “ eternal !”

It was for this sentiment, imprudently uttered, that the father Anselm threatened her with all the artillery of the church ; and decreed as a penance, to say daily, for a week, the seven penitential Psalms, the Angclus Domini ten times, the Litany of the Saints six, and the Rosary of the Blessed Virgin twenty-four. Yet was the little apostate pious, even to the definition

TO

TUB K0Y1CB OF

of St, Paul; for she “ laughed with thoeo (r that laughed, and wept with those that #f wept nor washer heart alive to an emotion that had not borrowed ils predo-minant feelings from the joy or sorrows of another.

Two years residence at the chateau had rendered her habitually necessary to the lady Magdelaine, but had not produced that intimate connection which sympathy alone engenders. Alike involved in literacy pursuits, and sequestered from the world, the strong opposition of their characters evinced that similar circumstances, when operating upon dissimilar minds, will produce effects equally opposite,

The freedom which began to display Itself in the opinions and conversation of her amanuensis, and the scepticism of her arguments even with the father director frequently elicited the reproof, and roused tho prthodo^ical fears of the lady Magdc* laine ? whilst Imogen, acting more under tho influence of conscious superiority than

ST, BQMIXÏCK.

71

prudence, frequently brought the arguments of her patroness and the friar to the test of her liberal acumen, and detected their alloy with an air so triumphantly playful, that she was always sure to ]qs$ by the victory ; and when additional se-verity pursued that triumph, used spar* lively to exclaim, with the celebrated king of Epirus, *« Another such victory, and Ï ff am lost.”

The growing apostacy of the young no* vice soon became a subject of discussion at the convent of St. Dominick, owing to the complaints of lady Magdelaine, The nuns trembled for their album sanctorum* Sister Agnes requested she might be re^ called, ere the spirit of Luther had wholly possessed her ; sister said an Ave Maria extraordinary j and the minor ennpness sung out a heathen h triumphq I	The

abbess howeyer, with a stronger view ta the chunk militant here on earth than the distant prp*peet of adding a saint to the convent list, treated the surmigea of

72

THE NOTICE OF

lady Magdelaine as the too sensitive apprehensions of extraordinary piety, and only recommended to her not to spare -wholesome severities and admonition, and urged the father director to wave his penitential crook over the sceptic head of the youthful apostate.

The abbess’s advice was not lost, yet apostacy seemed to feed on the antidote administered for its destruction:

No stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass.

Nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron, Can be attentive to the strength of spirit.

SuAKSTEARB.

Mean time the germ of proud ambition, cherished into being by the old nuns of St. Dominick in the heart of their young novice, stole into maturity with daily and insensible increase ; and if no longer emulative of a place in the album sanctorum of canonized spirits, the strong propensity to super-eminence still throbbed with vague but ardent palpitation at her heart.

ST. DOMINICK.

73

Attracted rather by the splendid than the awful virtues,, she embraced the brilliant theories of her imagination for the solid documents of reason; and enamoured by the beautiful ideal, the level path of cold “ flat reality” was neglected or contemned. Careless and unguarded, her conduct frequently evinced the little connection existing bet ween genius and common sense; sanguine and impatient, the extreme vivacity of her disposition was only restrained by a softness more (ban feminine, and a meek gentleness that sprung from a sensibility tremblingly alive to the remotest apprehension of offence. Her glowingand susceptible heart was prodigal in its feelings, ere reason could exert its influence to discriminate the justice of those claims which had roused its profound emotions into being; and, alive to those exquisite and delicious sensations which bestow rapturous moments rather than permanent felicity, she readily granted her accedence to the dangerous maxim,

VOL. I.

E

THE NOVICE or

QiTuu moment de vrai plaisir Vaut un siècle d’existence.

Le Moustier.

The naiveté, the atticism of her manners, evinced them to be solely influenced by the predominant feeling’ of the moment, unmodified by the varying* precept of fashion; unformed by the grotesque model of doating custom, they were natural, original, and pregnant with that indescribable something, which, analogous to the non sache of her person, awakened an interest rather felt than understood. Yet was not she perfectly beautiful: it was the thousand glowing sensibilies of her soul that gave her face its sweetest charm, as colours mounting on the tulip’s brilliant surface enrich it by the variety of their dyes. Her form, round and symmetrical, though below the ordinary stature, was perpetually animated by those graceful gestures which ever characterized her thoughts, even when silently conceived or imperfectly expressed ; and there was a

ST. DOMINICK

75

certain something, an inexpressible fascination, in her air and manner, which, like the philosopher’s fanciful definition of the soul, ff was all in all, and all in every “ part.” It was scarcely necessary that nature should have endowed her with woman’s dangerous attribute, eloquence, to have rendered her the most persuasive speaker in the world. Her voice, rich, varying, and mellifluous, was the organ of her soul ; and, vibrating in the unison to all its feelings, sometimes stole its murmur of caressing fondness on the heart, whose woes it soothed ; or, in the gayer moments of sportive animation, thrilled on the senses with syren influence, in pity or in joy, still giving to her words and sentiments a superadded existence.

The mystery which hung over the birth of the young novice had so many parallels among the foundling members of the convent, as to excite neither amazement nor curiosity in any breast but her own. There, however, it lived a subject of per-



THE NOVICE OF

petual interest and reflection : that tender heart, which, in the narrow sphere of her existence, throbbed in vain to meet with a kindred associate, delighted to lose itself in those fanciful speculations which restored her in idea to the endearments of parental love and the blessiugs of social affection. “ What,” she would exclaim to some nnsympathising*sister, in a paroxysm of romantic hope, “ What if at this mo-“ ment my father, .my mother, lived ! if I “ had not been torn from their arms in my “ infancy, or a happy chance now led “them to the asylum that received me! “ Oh ! 1 should know them among* a thousand; I feel I should; and then I would “ throw myself on their bosoms, and die “the blessed death of joy in their em-“ brace !” The nuns somewhat smiled at her enthusiasm, but more frequently inveighed against the weakness of all hu. man affections, and exhorted her to subdue their effects by prayer and mortification.

ST. DOMINICK.

77

Daring u severe winter, a robin had flown for shelter to her cell. The heart of Imogen throbbed with a violence equal to its own when she felt it fluttering in her bosom. It soon learnt to feed from her fosterins: hand : and when their alliance grew more intimate, it would sometimes receive its nutriment from her lip. All day it hovered round her, and at night it reposed on her bosom ; it seemed to have stolen the art of endearment from its tender mistress, and almost returned her caresses with the same ardour with which they were lavished. At last it died beneath the ruthless fangs of a cat of the order of St. Dominick ! Imogen was inconsolable. The abbess sternly reproved her for her sinful weakness,

"One must love something,” said the weeping novice.

" Where is the necessity ?” said the abbess coldly.

" Here !” said the novice, pressing her right hand (o her heart, and raising her

THE NOVICE OF

soul-illumined eyes to heaven, with an expression that seemed to say, And from frthee, O my heavenly Father, have I received it

CHAP. IV.

Or su—-e tempo Che tu t’en vada e troppo lungamenti,

Hai dimora ancora—

Partite.	Guarini.

Like blooming Eve

In nature’s young simplicity, and blushing With wonder at creation’s opening glow.

Walpole.

THE lady Magdelaine had not returned from matins five minutes, when the minstrel (the morning after his arrival) was summoned to receive his audience of leave. Ambrose conducted him to the entrance of the great gallery. The lady Magdelaine was standing at a distant window, in earnest conversation with her con-

ST. DOMINICK.

79

fes?or. They both turned round, and fixed their eyes on the stranger. The friar’s glance was keen, penetrating, and inquisitive: it seemed to anticipate verbal inquiry, and to threaten certain disapprobation ; for he saw in the minstrel the young brother of the Cistercian order, or perhaps something still more dangerous.

The minstrel soon found he was drawn thither to gratify the friar’s curiosity, rather than to obtain the necessary leave of departure, which the attempered looks of the lady seemed to deny; for the friar’s questions were numerous, perplexing, and shrewd; the minstrel's answers were simple, ingenuous, and plausive. lie repeated, at lady Magdelaine’s request, his little story with undeviating accuracy.

“It is too simple not to be true,” said the lady Magdelaine softly. “ And too “inconsequent to need a comment/* sard the friar pointedly. Then turning round, he seemed in a sotlo voce to expostulate rather than converse with her. At that

so

THE NOVICE OF

moment Imogen appeared, crossing (he gallery in a direct line to the spot where they stood. Her step was light and devious, her upcast e'ye beamed with the light of genius, and the glow which flushed her cheek seemed to ebb and flow to the impulses of her agitated fancy. Her veil had fallen on her shoulder, and discovered the fine contour of her head and neck. It was the head of a Sappho, deficient only in (hat voluptuous langour which should characterize the countenance of the enamoured Lesbian. It was perhaps rather the head of St. Cecilia under the influence of a musical rapture. A pencil, which she held in one hand, was suspended over the tablet which the other contained ; and she appeared in the act of luring back to her memory some happy but truant thought which the “thick-coming fancies” of poetical inspiration had hurried half-realized into oblivion.

Nature had not wholly abandoned her weaknesses in the breast of the friar; and

ST. DOMINICK.

81

the point in debate between him and the lady Magdelaine seemed little favourable to those “ leavings of mortal ty.” It was with difficulty he had restrained the overflowing of his gall, when the novice of St. Dominick appeared to receive its bitter ebullition on her innocent head.

Why, fypw now, daughter?” said the friar sternly. Imogen started : the spell was dissolved; the spirit of genius fled; and, hastilv consigning her tablet to her girdle, she drew her veil forward, and paid the salutations of the morning.

The lady Magdelaine leaned in a musing attitude against the frame of the casement* and was silent The minstrel stood concealed behind a projecting pillar. Imogen* the emblem of health and cheerfulness, advanced towards the friar. ci I had 7 hoped* daughter/’ said the father director, “yes, hoped, that sickness had pre-vented your assistance at matins to-day; fffor I hold notin competition the tempo-e 2

THE NOVICE OF

“rary sufferings of the perishable body “ wit!) the soul’s eternal torture : but that “ flushing cheek, elastic gait, this smile “ scarce concealed, speak, fatally speak, “the body’s health robust, the soul’s “ deadly sickness 1”

“ Father, 1 knew not that health was a ee crime,” said Imogen wilh'fcimplicily.

“ To devote ourselves to the vague and “ sinful wishes which redundant health inspires ; to pursue their gratification, to “the neglect of our religious duties ; that is “criminal, daughter: but. Holy Mother ! “in \ou, who are destined to become the “spouse of God'’—Imogen, shuddering, seemed to recoil from an honour she deemed profanation.

“ Why wast thou not at matins ?” sternly demanded the father.

“ Dear father, the saints are witness it “ was my intention ; nay, already had I “ reached the chapel, when I met”— “Whom?” said the friar, in triumphant expectation.











-.

■ <*». • - r





fc-'.r- ■ rr ■• ■

-.—	.».	-r.i - /• »—.**



[uè^ i*~» s.

n>* *1^1 y



TUE NOVICE OP

SI

“a butterfly the same? and did not you tell “me the soul was fancifully supposed by “the Greeks to exhale itself from the lips “ of the departed in the form of that “lovely insect? Oh! it was a beautiful “idea: and how often has the similitude “struck me, when I have felt the spirit of “my bosom, restless, fluttering', agitated, “still soaring* beyond its destined point of “elevation, still reposing its joys on the “bosom of future bliss! Oh, but this “butterfly! It fled the cloister’s gloom. “Poor insect! how natural ! Unwittingly “ I pursued its devious flight. Its rich “ wings of purple and gold expanded to “every gale, glittered to every sun-beam. “ It revelled in such variety of bliss, so free, “so wild, so uncontroled, that I sighed, “ and wished to be a butterfly ; and, in “good sooth, forgot my matins.”

“ Cease these ravings of thy distemper-“ed fancy,” impatiently interrupted the father, “hitherto tolerated in a child, but “grossly impious in the maturing mind of

ST. DOMINICK.

85

“ one who approaches the hour of holy “ initiation into the sacred mysteries of the “church.”

“ Indeed, father ! and does that honour “ exclude me from adoring’ the Deity in “ his works ?”

“ Adore him, daughter, in thy cell, in “holy seclusion, in his consecrated tem-“ pies, in monastic privacy : he asks no “ more.”

“Then may the spontaneous offerings “of my heart, though unasked, he not “unaccepted! This morning, father, when “ my steps deviated from the chapel to that “glowing valley where all nature hymned “the praises of its God, thinkest thou my “orisons were less fervent because less “ systematic ? Oh, father ! when I inhaled “ new beiiiff with the morning’s fragrant

o	o	o

“breath ; when that glorious orb rose on “my rapt gaze, and every dewy blossom “expanded its bosom to the genial in-“ fluence of its beams, and shed fresh per-“ fume on the air ; when every bird sung

86

THE NOVICE OF

“ its song of rapture, and every trembling “leaf seemed endued with a tongue to “breathe its praise to the Most High; “thinkest thou, amidst this soul-inspiring “scene, my full heart was silent? that on “me alone the light of heaven beamed in “ vain ? Father, the tear of rapturous gratitude is not yet dry upon my cheek: “that tear was my morning sacrifice to “ heaven/'

“ Father,” said the lady Magdelaine, “your patience amazes me. This is “tantamount to the dangerous opinions “of Spinosa: Manchees himself never “ breathed stronger materialism :	the

“ Gnostics are more Christian in their “ ideas.”

“ Dearest madam,” said Imogen softly, “ sure I have breathed no heterodox opi-“ nion, no heretical tenet ; yet,” she added playfully, “were I to become a heretic, “ in good sooth 1 believe it should be of “ the Gnostic order, such as you described “ them, father, in your sermon on the eve

ST. DOMINICK.

87

i( of St. Agnes, there is so much variety “ in their seven heavens !”

“ Corruplio optimi pessima /” ejaculated the father to the lady Magdelaine, turning up his eyes. But 1 coinmend her, daughter, to thy prayers and exhor-‘f talions. Let us trust it is the weakness f‘ of her brain, rather than the viciousness “ of her heart, that deludes her/’ Then muttering a few low words to the lady Magdelaine, he added aloud, “ Thou “ knowest, lady, sacred duty calls me to “ attend the consistorial meeting of St.

Menhoulm. There shall I some days “ sojourn : in the mean time, to the saint’s ft holy care and guidance I consign thee. * The lady Magdelaine bowed to receive the benediction which followed.

" And thou, young stranger/’ added the friar, walking towards the minstrel, who “ hast received so liberally the rites of “ hospitality, depart in peace ; here thou “ mayest not longer tarry ; it is the will

98

THE NOVICE OF

<f of the lady de Montmorell. Go, and “ St. Dominick be thy speed Vf

The minstrel, advancing’ a few steps, pressed his bands to his breast, bowed grateful acknowledgment to the lady Mag-delaine, and profound obedience to the friar; who, waving his hand with a patriarchal air, pronounced a Dominus vobis-cum, and retired.

It was now for the first time Imogen perceived the proximity of the minstrel ; it was now for the first time she raised her timid looks, and met his eye. It was an-eye that spoke its intimate connection with the soul, and the glance it emanated-left upon the imagination something that dared the power of language to define; it sunkakonce to the heart of Imogen, and became there a new sensation.

Unaccustomed to the presence of a stranger, the habitual bashfulness of a young recluse veiled the vivacity of temperament, the aberrations of genius, and

ST. DOMINICK.

89

the playfulness of youth. Blushing, confused, and overwhelmed, Imogen drew down her veil, and played with the rosary that hung at her girdle.

With an air doubtful and hesitating, with a look of vexatious disappointment, the lady Magdelaine still remained leaning against the window-frame, silent and undecided ; when, casting a glance to the court below, she observed the father ascending his litter for St. JVlenhoulm ; and as his eye met lier’s, a faint benediction reached her ear. Her wavering resolutions steadied to the tone of his voice.— She turned round to the minstrel, who, half-retreating, half-loitering, seemed as undecided as herself.

“ Young stranger/’ said she, in a tone of affected softness, “pursue thy way: “ may the muses be propitious to thy ef-<f forts! may Apollo smile upon thy votive “ lay ! may the saints protect thee in thy “ devious wanderings!”

With this half-heathenish, half*chris-

90

THE NOVICE OF

tian invocation, the lady Magdelaine slowly retired; nor, in the absence of her mind, perceived that she had left Imogen behind her.

The tall spectral figure of lady Magde-Jaine had disappeared more than a minute, ere Imogen herself observed her situation. She started, and glided swiftly after the lady, slightly but courteously bowing her heàd as she passed the minstrel. The minstrel bowed reverentially.

Had the image of his tutelar saint passed him in solemn procession. Devotion could not have stamped her trails of pious reverence and profound homage more impressively on his countenance.

Already had Imogen reached the head of the great stairs, which descended to the hall below, when the minstrel’s voice arrested her attention, and she heard his footsteps echoing to her own.

“Stay, lady f’ said he, in a voice of supplicating earnestness: “one moment " stay !”

ST. DOMINICK.

91

Imogen turned round in surprise, in confusion. The minstrel drew back, fastened his eyes on the earth, and remained silent; but his silence was eloquence itself. A request seemed to hover on his lip, but the finger of modesty checked its utterance: he raised his eyes, and Imogen read it there.

“ What wouldst thou, stranger?” softly demanded the novice, her own timidity vanishing before the more obvious confu-sion of the minstrel. The minstrel sighed, pressed his hand to his heart, yet was silent.

“ Wouldst thou that I exert my little “ influence with the lady Magdelaine in “ thy favour ?” said she, construing the charactery of his brow into the most probable sense.

Thou art all benevolent,” said the minstrel, eagerly seizing on the construction she had given his wishes, “ and hast tf anticipated my petition.*"

“ Speak then j how can I serve thee?”

92

THE NOVICE OF

modestly returned Imogen, with eyes fastened on the earth, and a faint smile of encouragement playing round her lip.

<f By procuring me leave from the lady “ Magdelaine to remain a few days longer “ beneath her hospitable roof.”

<f Alas, that thy request should exceed “ my ability to obtain it ! The lady Mag-“ delaine is peremptory iti her resolves: “ and though in this respect they were not cl to militate against thy wishes, still would iC she not oppose those of her director ; and “ they, 1 fear, are not in thy favor.”

“ Indeed !” exclaimed the minstrel.

<f Indeed,” said Imogen : " he wills not te that strangers find an asylarn in the “ chateau ; and in the unhappy situation “ of the times, claims that sanction for his “ scruples which humanity would with-“ hold.”

<c Alas! then thou refusest me?”

“ Indeed I scarcely dare hazard a re-“ quest so hopeless of success ; yet change “ that request, and put my wish to serve

ST. DOMINICK.

93

thee to the test. The lady Magdelaine ct is rich, a lover of the arts.”—Imogen paused, and blushed : the pride, the delicacy, of a young mind, with respect to pecuniary matters, withheld the offer she was about to make in the name of lady Magdelaine.

“ This harp is not the badge of beg-“ gary, lady,” said the minstrel proudly ; “ that which alone I would stoop to beg *' for, you have refused.”

f< In good sooth,” said Imogen, blushing still deeper, yet with a smile which she meant should heal the wound she had inflicted, “ thou wouldst too soon repent “ thou hadst preferred thy singular peti-<f tion, or that I had obtained its request; “ for, trust me, thy professionally roving “ disposition, thy gay and charming avo-fc cation, would ill accord with the solemn “ gloom, the sequestered tranquillity, of “ this profound solitude.”

“ Lady,” said the minstrel, with energy, “ the nightingale, when first he soars be-

THE NOVICE OF

“ yond the parent’s fostering wing, roves “ unrestrained, and (lings with careless " prodigality his witching strain o’er all <( the scenes of varying nature ; till, lured “ by instinct to the rose’s bloom, he {i fastens on a neighbouring spray, nor “ seeks to pour his strain beyond bis idol “ (lower’s balmy sphere.***

“ I perceive not thy allusion,” said Imogen, casting down her eyes, and changing colour.

tr But I feel it,” said the minstrel, with impassioned energy.

A faint blush, like a transient sun-beam, suffused the face of Imogen ; and with a faint farewell she was retiring, when the minstrel, laying aside his harp, sprang after her, caught the flowing drapery of her robe, and exclaimed :

“ Yet, oh fair being! one moment stay, one little moment !” *

* In allusion to the beautiful Persian fable of the nightingale being- enamoured of the rose.

ST. DOMINICK.

9b

tf What woulds't thou then Î” said Imo~ feen, trembling and confused.

Cf Thy forgiveness.*’

“ But how forgive, where no offence “ was offered ?**

“ Thou sayest true ; no offence has been “ offered ; for heaven itself does not re-“ ject the homage of the heart, however “ inadequately expressed.”

fc Hark ! ’lis the lady Magdelaine’s bell, “Fare thee well. I will remember thee “ in my orisons.**

“ Wilt thou—wilt thou indeed ? Then “ henceforth be Imogen my tutelarsaint,” said the minstrel, dropping on one knee, “ and the sublime and holy sentiments “ her lips so lately breathed my ortho-“ doxy !”

“ Farewell ! farewell !” said Imogen, with increased confusion ; (< longer I dare <f not tarry".’*

“ But if thou darest !” said the minstrel, in a tone of soft but sly insinuation.

“ Nay,” said Imogen, with a smile,

96

THE NOVICE OF

“ wouldst thou turn inquisitor to thy tf saint to prove her fallibility?’' Then, loosing her robe from his grasp, she gracefully waved her hand, and with the airy step of a hamadryad vanished from his view7.

The minstrel remained for a considéra- ^ ble time in the recumbent attitude in which the novice had left him. It was the sight of her tablet, which had fallen from her girdle, that acted like a spell on his senses, and restored him to himself.— He hastily snatched it up, and, turning over its leaves, read the following

ODE TO A BUTTERFLY.

Child of a sun-beam, airy minion,

Whither points thy flutt’ring pinion ?

Pinion dipt in rain-bow hues.

Pinion gem’d with sparkling dews,

Shed from many a weeping fiow'r,

Bath’d in Matin’s rosy show’r :

Tell me why thy form so bland Still eludes my eager hand :

ST. DOMINICK.

97

Tell me, wanton, wouliTst thou be Madly wild and wildly free ?

If freedom is thy life’s best treasure,

Then get thee hence, gay child of pleasure. From feudal tow’r and cloist’ral cell.

For freedom there did never dwell;

And I no more thy form will woo.

But pleas’d thy varied flight pursue.

And now upon a zephyr’s sigh Thou seem’st in languid trance to die ;

Now flutt’ring wild, thy golden winglet Sports in many a wanton ringlet.

Or soar’st to drink the sun’s first gleam. And bask thee in each infant beam ;

Then panting in thy heav’n-snatch’d glow,

I feel thee fluttering round my brow. Whence thy breezy plumage chases Each tear the hand of sorrow traces ;

Or as athwart my lip you fly,

Fan away the woe-born sigh :

Tear of sorrow—sigh of woe.

Early taught by fate to flow,

From a heart a stranger still To nature’s dearest sweetest thrill :

Tear of sorrow, sigh of woe.

Ne’er giv’n thee, happy thing, to know; Thee, whose life, a raptur’d minute.

Bears an age of blisses in it ;

VOL. I.

F

98

THE NOVICE OV

Thee, whose life, a minute’s measure, Dawns, exists, and fades in pleasure.

Oh, insert of the painted wing !

I’ve watch’d live from the morning’s spring As idly lapt in soit repose,

’Midst the blushes of a rose.

The playful zephyr’s balmy breath Has wak'd thee from thy transient death ; Or the bee, in tuneful numbers.

Put to flight thy fragrant slumbers ;

And as thy wings of varied hue,

(Dipt in rose-embosom’d dew,)

You fiutt’ring imp, and deftly try,

Still J follow^, still you fly ;

Ever wav’ring, ever changing,

Never fix’d, and always ranging.

’Midst the lavish charms of nature,

Thou her freest gayest creature ;

Now the tulip’s changeful die,

Now the vi’let’s balmy sigh,—

Now the rose’s orient glow,

Now the lily’s tintless snow.

Woo and win thy brief caress.

Alternate pall, alternate bless !

Till the summer’s glow is o’er.

Till her beauties bloom no more :

Then the flow’r, whose fragrant sigh Survives her warmly-blushing die,

Lures thee to a heav’n of rest,

On her pale but cdorous breast ;

ST. DOMINICK.

99

And, amidst her balmy treasures,

Thou diest in sweet excess of pleasures ! Oh happy careless tiling ! could I But live like thee, but like thee die,— Like thee resign my fleeting breath.

My life of bliss in blissful death,

I’d envy not th’ extended span.

The patriarchal day of man.

For him let Time's protracting pow’rs Still spare existence, drooping flowTs, And wreaths of joyless years entwine. But, Oh! on e raptur’d hour bo mine !

The minstrel was a poet of Nature's own making, and his judgment was drawn from the same source as his inspiration ; he was therefore no stranger to the justest purest rules of criticism: but what had the rules of criticism to do* with the rhapsodic effusion of impulsive fancy, or awakened feeling? Or how was the judgment to exercise its powers on the poem, while the heart, in the utmost vehemence of emotion, hung enraptured on the charms of the poetess ? There was, besides, in the fragment a consonance of sentiment

100

THE NOVICE OF

with that the minstrel himself cherished, that awakened his sympathy and secured his admiration. <( Delightful enthusiasm !” he exclaimed, “ fanciful but bewitching ‘e being! how extatic to share with thee €t thy • raptur'd hour !* to participate in “ thy fairy visions, to live beneath the <f warm beam of thine eye, and hang upon “ the melting murmur of thy voice ! to “ spurn the cold dull forms of a world for “ which thou wert never created, and to “ range with thee through all theyet-un-“ conjectured bounds of feeling, sentiment^ and passion !”

CHAP. V.

Credi a me—

Non e pene magiore

Che in vecchie membra il pizzecor d’amore.

Pastor Fide, Atto prima.

IMOGEN, en revente, wandered from the gallery to the great hall, from the great hall to the corridor, and from tl\ence

ST. DOMINICK.

101

to the lady’s Magdelaine's study. Fancy and recollection were busy with the heart, and the mind was turned adrift under the influence of its own unconscious égarements. She found (yet scarce perceived) the lady Magdelaine seated at her writing-table, her eyes fixed on vacancy, her right hand supporting her head, the fingers of her left playing with the leaves of a superb missal, which lay open before her. She took no notice of Imogen’s entrance, who, w ith an air equally abstracted, seated herself at her little desk, and, as if touched by the magic wand of sympathy, fell into the same reflective attitude.

It is one of the properties of fire, under the influence of experimental philosophy, to blaze with greatest ardor at the moment it posses-es the least power to consume : it was thus with the heart of the lady Magdelaine—it flamed when most incapable of communicating the faintest glow to the most inflammable object, and languished beneath the f besoin de l'ame

THE NOVICE OF

103

' tendre,’ without the power of exciting- it in another in the remotest degree ;—philosophy was no proof against the eloquence of brilliant ejes, and the enthusiasm of devotion did not transmute its object without abating its ardor.

The lady Magdelaine went from the gallery to her study, whither the minstrel’s form pursued her. She fixed her eyes on the picture of St. Peter, and bowed her head ; but his saintship disappeared, and the lady Magdelaine saw nothing but the symmetrical form of a young man leaning on his harp. She opened her missal, but her eye was incapable of receiving on its retina any object but one; and the missal’s holy leaves, like the picture of St. Peter, presented nothing to her view but the minstrel. A thousand times she likened herself to Dido and the minstrel to Eneas, whom the God of Storms had thrown on her protection ; nor could all the self-interested sophistry of the father Anselm reconcile her to the

ST. DOMINICK.

103

step she had taken in banishing him from the asylum he had sought. Imogen had been some time seated opposite to her before the silence mutually preserved was broken by her ladyship.

“ Mathias Corvinus, king of Hungary, u kept three hundred secretaries/' said the lady Magdelaine. “Poor souls!” said Imogen, with a sigh of fellow-feeling, and dipping her pen in the ink, preparatory to her taking down what she supposed the learned minutes of the lady Magdelaine for a future chapter of the Crusades.

“ The father Anselm,” continued lady Magdelaine, ff thinks one more than “ enough for me.” Imogen answered with a sigh, heavier than she had already heaved. “ Longinus was private secre-" tary to the famous queen Zenobia; and “ yet I have read he was young and “ handsome when she first received him “ into her service,” muttered the lady.

104

THE NOTICE OF

<f That could have been no objection/' said the novice innocently.

'c The father Anselm thinks otherwise,” said the lady Magdelaine. <f Holy Mo-ci th'er! why has he not the liberality of “ St. Jerome, who expressly tells us, ‘ Fear God, and do what you will ?' ” Egenhart was secretary to Charles er the Great,” continued the lady Magdelaine, musing, "whenlmma, the empe-“ ror’s daughter, became enamoured of 4t him. Poets and musicians are certainly “ dangerous inmates, and, in a domestic <{ capacity not to be guarded against : witness the attachment of the empress ff Julia to Ovid;—”

“ Was he her secretary ?” asked Imogen simply.

The queen of Navarre’s penchant for the poet Amayot, her amanuensis ; <( and, lastly, the unfortunate passion of ff Mary, queen of Scots, for Rizzio, who “ was only a poor Italian minstrel.”

ST. DOMINICK.

105

“ And was lie young, and handsome, “ and graceful ?” eagerly demanded Imogen.

“ He was ugly and deformed,” replied the lady Magdelaiue.

“ That men should be so different!5’ sighed Imogen.

“ What an Herculean labour have I “ undertaken ?’ said the lady Magdelaine, looking round at the books, papers, and manuscripts, that lay scattered in disorder on every side. “ Surely mine is the des-“ tiny of the Danaides ; what a treasure “ would a young man be to me, who “ could arrange, connect, and transcribe “ with fidelity ; who would be modest, “unassuming, and respectful! For in» “stance, if father Anselm had not the “same objection to my employing this “young stranger as an amanuensis, as he “had to my retaining him in his musical “ capacity,”—

“ Which I dare say he has not,” ex-

claimed Imogen with vivacity.

e 2

106

THE NOVICE OF

“And that this young Orlando could “write a good hand;”—

“ Which I could swear he does, madam said Imogen eagerly.

“But what avails it now?” said the lady Magdelaine, sighing, “ since he has departed.”

“Not ten minutes back I saw him in “the gallery,” said Imogen, blushing: “and Theodore waits in the anti-chamber, “if you have commands for him.”

“Well then,” said the lady Magdelaine, in a tone of hesitation, “you may, “if you please, tell the page to command “the strangers attendance; not that I “positively mean to—”

Before she had finished the doubtful sentence, Imogen had delivered her message to Theodore.

In a few minutes the page returned leading in the minstrel: Imogen hung her head over her desk, and seemed deeply engaged with her pen ; the ladv Magdelaine assumed an unusual air of dignity

ST. DOMINICK.

107

and reserve, as if to hide the weakness of her heart beneath the severity of her manners and countenance. The minstrel, with a look of mingled suspense, impatience, and hope, stood in respectful silence, to know the nature of those commands which had again brought him to her presence.

After an awful pause, the lady Magde-laine exclaimed :	Ere	I	inform thee,

“ young stranger, of the motives which “ have induced me to recal you, it is necessary you should know, that I have long “ since devoted my life to the service of “ the church and the republic of letters. “ Thou wilt start at a determination so "extraordinary in a female, for the days “ of piety and learning are no more; we “ must no longer hope to see a shelf, like “ that in the library of Euclid, filled with “ the works of learned ladies ; we must no “ longer hope to hear of a philosophess like Dama the daughter of Pythagoras, “ or Theano of Crete ; such an historian

108

THE NOVICE OF

“as Anna dc Commines, or such a poetess “as Sappho of Lesbia, or Corinna of ct Thebes ; and female sanctity is, I am “ afraid, a treasure still rarer than female “genius, to he found in this Gothic age ; “ a perfect union of both is, perhaps, in “any age, a rara avis in terra !”

The lady Magdelaine paused, and raised her eyes to observe the effect her learned speech and modest inuendo had produced on the minstrel ; but unhappily, at that moment, the minstrel was observing the effect produced by a sunbeam, as it fell like a glory round the seraph head of Imogen, and touched her form wdth something more than human. The lady Magdelaine bit her lips, hemmed away her mortification, and desired Imogen to retire till she was sent for.

Imogen, who blushed equally for the pedautic folly and childish vanity of her patroness, and blushed a still deeper dye at the slily observed gaze of the minstrel, w'as glad to be dismissed, though her little

THE NOVICE OE

109

heart throbbed with impatient curiosity to learn the result of that conversation from which she was excluded. She arose and retired from the study, with that downcast look of unaffected modesty which ever gave to her air and countenance the chaste attractions of vestal purity.

While lady Magdelaine remained in a tete-à-têle conference with the young stranger, Imogen flew to the garden.— The brilliant beams of the meridian sun, the tempered freshness of the noontide air, the melody of the birds, the balmy fragrance of every fleeting zephyr, were all in unison with the tone of her spirits, and spoke a language her heart understood. Plunged in that luxurious flow of thought which a new and pleasing object awakens in a mind long steeped in the sluggish inanity which solitude uninterrupted and a perpetual sameness of objects and ideas impress, a thousand new-born pleasures fluttered at her bosom; every nerve was in that state of refined susceptibility which

110

THE NOVICE OF

thrills to the faintest touch ; every pulse throbbed to the animating influence of some sweet and novel emotion. “ Why <c am I so happy ?" asked Imogen, with a light bound, while the fragile blossom scarcely bent its head beneath the airy pressure of her foot ; then with a sudden transition of thought, though not wholly unconnected with the self-interrogation, she began to reckon over all the men she had ever seen.

It required no great extent of arithmetical powers to complete the calculation : Two friars of the order of St. Francis/' said Imogen, counting on her fingers, “ four of St. Dominick, and two lay bro-ff thers of the Cordeliers, all old, ugly, cc and bigoted; the bishop of Champagne, ff in his last visitation to our convent— “ what an unwieldy bloated form, and ,c what a rigid air!—our three successive “ confessors at the convent; the first (t squinted most hideously, the second “ was turned of seventy, and the third/’—

ST. DOMINICK.

Ill

all the inquisitorial horrors of father Anselm’s countenance stared her in the face : —'f‘ an interesting young monk, in the last stage of a consumption/* continued the novice, torturing her memory, who <f came to our abbess for a small piece of <f the rod with which St. Dominick used ff to flagellate himself, as a charm against “ his disorder ; the Clincaillen,* who ff sells us reliquaries, crucifixes, and sweet.

meats, at the convent gates; four old <f knights of Mount St. Michael, occa-“ sional visitors to lady Magdelaine, with <f war and famine lurking in every linear (e ment of their harsh faces ; and two “ knights of St. John of Jerusalem—the one with a wooden leg, the other want-ff ingan eye. These are all I can recol-*e lect, except the ferocious-looking serfs tc of the forest, the old domestics of the chateau, young Theodore the page, and “ this young minstrel/*

* Cliucaillen, a travelling pedlar.

112

THE NOVICE OF

Imogen blushed to her eyes as she concluded her calculation.

“ Perfection itself/’ said Imogen, with the air of a little logician, is only esti-“ mated as such by comparison ; the form et and manners of this stranger may not positively possess all that excellence I ascribe to them ; but, by comparing bim “ with all the men I have ever seen, his fc superiority is so eminent, that I could almost believe him a creature of another sphere, a being of some superior mould, t( and formed of finer clay. Good hea-vens ! (coloring again, but not quite so “ deeply,) how the minor canoness would laugh at this fanciful idea, and call it “ the wild flight of her romantic little te saint! What is this minstrel to me? “ only one must think of something/' said Imogen, tearing a (lower she had just gathered to pieces, and entering the door of the great hall, when she meant to have turned towards the terrace.

“ Here is rare news/’ said Beatrice^

ST. DOMINICK.

113

running against her : f< holy rosary ! who “ would ever have thought to see any “ thing young and handsome in the cha-f; tenu again !"

“ Thou art in good spirits, Beatrice,’' said Imogen, smiling.

“ Certes, mademoiselle, and with good “ reason ; 1 thought we should never have ff danced a courante again. But I must “ hie me to the tapestry-room, to tell them f' the news."

fc What news, I prithee?" demanded Imogen, catching the flying Beatrice by the gown.

“ Why, mademoiselle, do you not know my lady has hired the minstrel ? I just <f stepped into my lady’s study to know “ whether I was to give Mr. Jephtha a black eye, and how the poor dear young cf demoiselle’s robe was to be shaded whom they are going to sacrifice, when <e who should I find there but our old “ maitre-d'hotel and the young minstrel ! * I have added this youth,’ said my lady

114

THE NOTICE OS'

st to Ambrose, f to my household establish-“ ment; and he is to have an apartment “ to himself, and a table to himself, for I u have conferred on him the honor of be-“ ing m} private secretary.’—But, blessed “ Agnes ! the dinner-bell rings, and not “ a stitch done yet!”

Beatrice flew up the great stairs leading to the tapt stry-room, and Imogen turned into the dining-hall. The lad}' Magde-laine was already seated at table; the novice started to find the day so much older than she suspected, and seated herself in silence opposite to her patroness. Had Pythagoras presided at the feast, a more unbroken taciturnity could not have been preserved, or the law of temperance been more strictly attended to.

Although pleasingly involved in the novel variety of her own emotions, the attention of Imogen was insensibly attracted to the alteration visible in the air, manner, and dress, of her associate.

The lady Magdelaine, who had hitherto

ST. DOMINICK.

115

considered a total disregard and neglect of (he proprieties of dress as the most irrefragable proof of internal acquirements and literary pursuits, and often quoted the purposely-inked nails of the emperor Julian as authority for her contempt of all the bienséance of the toilet, now appeared to Imogen for the first time to have sacrificed to the Graces; but the Graces, as if to show their pique for the former heresy of their new convert, were most unpropi-tious toiler offering.

A coif or ruff, never worn since the celebrated tournament given at the coronation of Francis II. and a fardingale of cut velvet, made after the fashion of one of the beautiful Diana of Poitiers, produced no other effect than to render ugliness and deformity more apparent.

Imogen had recourse to the bouquet in her bosom to conceal the ever-ready smile that hovered on her lips ; while Ambrose, Bernardine, and Jaques, as they attended at table, cast many a glance, pregnant

116

THE NOVICE OF

>vith reverence and admiration, at the immense gold etui which hung at their lady's side, sufficiently ponderous to throw her off her centre, had she not given equilibrium to the balance in a fan of proportionable magnitude, which now hung from her girdle, and, on state days, was the rod of office that denoted the official capacity of her page.

Silent, musing, and reflective, as she played with her spoon and plate, Imogen imagined she was busy with the bishop of Citeauxand St. Bonaventure ; for Imogen was ignorant of the complicated anatomy of the human heart, and was only a logician when the cause or effect interested her mind, or awakened her apprehension.

Ambrose, however, somewhat more penetrating, observed to Bernardine, as he replaced the silver cup and massy salver in the buttery, “ that, although his lady “ was silent, he knew she was in a diable ‘f de bon humeur, for he observed her tf smile more than once; not to mention/'

ST. DOMINICK.

117

said the maître-d’hotel, <f her calling me Monsieur Ambrose, and ordering me to “ treat this new secretary with a flask of light muscadel ;—mort de ma vie ! I “ baye more than half a mind to ask her “ good leave to ride the Spanish jennet as “ far as St. Menhoulm, for my new doub-ff let and hose.’'

CHAP. VI.

If music be the food of love, play on.

Shakespeare.

O si una vola Volta il provassi ;

Se sapessi una volta

Qua’ li e grazia e ventura

L’essere amato il posjidere amando.

Un reamante Core ;

So ben io che direste,

Dolce vita amorosa,

Perche si tardinel mio Cor venesti.

Guarini.

THE lady Magdelaine retired from the dining-hall to her oratory, as was her usual custom ; and Imogen, having turn-

118

THE NOVICE OF

bled over a hundred books in the library without reading a line in one, sauntered to the tapestry-room. She found the demoiselles Beatrice, Blanche, and Agnes, busy with the sacrifice of Jephtha’s daughter.

“ Pardie!” said Beatrice, continuing a conversation which the entrance of Imogen had for a moment interrupted, “ here “ is mademoiselle will end the dispute at “ once.”

ff I prithee let me hear it,” said Imogen, seating herself at a vacant frame.

“ Why, mademoiselle,” said Blanche, “ His all about the colour of the min-“ strel’s eyes. Agnes will have it they are “ black as her jacket; Beatrice vows they “ are blue: holy mother! if 1 know whe-" ther he has an eye in his head why then

amla saint! though certes, methought, “ he looked marvelously like the picture “ of Beelzebub in the shape of a comely “ youth, in the legend of St. Maxima ; if and I warrant you I counted my beads

ST. DOMINICK.

119

“ under my fardingale all the time I was in his presence.”

“ Thou art always counting thy beads " somewhere or other,” said Beatrice ;

but I would lay my watchel-coloured “ taffety to a copper sous, that for every “ Ave Maria thou say est for thy soul, thou <c repeatest ten for a husband.”

“ Better pray for a husband for one’s rf self,” said Blanche sneeringly, than <( take up with the cast-off affections of " other folk’s husband.”

fC Blessed St. Dominick! there's an im-“ putation!” said Beatrice colouring;but I scorn your words, mademoiselle: and “ though you are so devout, and such a “ mass-woman withal, I doubt if you were “ counting your beads under your fardin-“ gale when the young minstrel was ff squeezed into the oriel window with you “ this morning, and you were winding “ the silk off his hands, when all the rest ” of the family were at matins.”

no

THE NOVICE OF

“ Did you wind your silk off his hands, “Blanche?” said Imogen, snapping her needle in two.

“ Pardie! and what of that, mademoi-“ selle ?” said Blanche: “the saints are “ witness 1 was repeating my litanies, and “ thinking of no mortal man, when my “ reel snapped, and the minstrel, who was “ walking up and down in the hall, had “ the civility to offer to hold my silk.”

“ The minstrel,” said Beatrice sarcastically, “knew—”

“What of the. minstrel ?” interrupted the lady Magdelaine, at that moment entering the apartment ; “ what of the min-“ strel ? and what licence are you giving “ your tongues ? Beatrice, must I always “ command you to sacrifice to the goddess “ Muta, or warn you of the fate of Lara, “ who, though celebrated for her elocu-“ tion, lost her voice from speaking too ff much ?”

“ Well, lady, I am silent,” said Beatrice ;

ST. DOMINICK.

121

“ marry, if I speak another word to-day,

“ I will give any one leave to cut my tongue out.,,

ffYou may finish, however, what you were going to say when I entered the room/’ said the lady Magdelaine, significantly.

Beatrice plied her needle, and continued obstinately silent.

Who is it was speaking of the min-strel ?’* said the lady Magdelaine peevishly.

tf Dear, my lady,” said Blanche, we ff were only saying, that, with your lady-ship’s good liking, it would be pure pleasant pastime to have monsieur le troubadour singing and playing for us while we are at our frames, especially as we have wrought hard all day.” ff Why, damsels,” said the lady Magdelaine, with a look of unusual complacency, ff 1 should have no objection toin-“ dulge you in a matronalia, which was “ tantamount to the Saturnalia of the men

G

122

TUE NOVICE OF

rf among the Romans; but I have not en* “ gaged this youth in the capacity of a “ musician, buta secretary. Yet, as this “ is the festival of St. Theodora, and you “ have 'worked hard all day—”

“ Sweet, my lady,” said Beatrice, forgetting her vow, and oversetting her frame as she leaped up ; “sweet my lady, you are “ all goodness, and I will have the minstrel “ here in the twinkling of a needle.” And before the lady Magdelaine had finally decided on the propriety of suffering her young secretary in his musical character into her presence, Beatrice returned, ushering him in. He had brought his harp, and bowing low as he entered, cast a modest glance towards lady Magdelaine, expressive of his sensibility for the favor conferred on him. That glance steadied the wavering intention of his patroness. “ He “ is timid, modest, and unobtrusive,” said she mentally, “and needs encouragement.” Then, after a pause, she exclaimed, in her usual tone of dignified solemnity:

ST. DOMINICK,

123

“ Although I have only engaged thee “ in the sober station of a secretary, nor “ with a view to encourage unlicensed “ merriment among my domestics, yet, as “ I may sometimes call on the witcheries i: of thy art to dispel the cloud which “ Study hangs on the brow of her vo* u taries, I have summoned thee this even-“ ing to give me-a specimen of thy tune-C£ ful powers. Although no performer my-Cf self, (though I once touched the lute cc and recorder,) the progress of harmony “ is not unknown to me. ’Tis to Apollo “ we owe the invention of the lyre. He C£ owed it to love, and first tuned its “ chords to soften the cruelty of Daphne. “ Timotheus would have enriched it with “ a few additional strings, had not the “ muses forbade the innovation. But it was <c by the voice, which Zeno calls the flower “ of beauty, that Apollo won the prize “ fromMarsyas and Pan. Plato has termed <( poetry without music, a beautiful face “ which has io*t its bloom ; Epaminondas

THE NOVICE OF

124

“ was reproached for his musical igno-“ ranee ; Socrates did not disdain to study “its theory, and Pythagoras reduced it to “mathematical rule; not to mention those “great musicians, Olympus the Phrygian, “Aristoxines. and Ptolemy. Alas! we xt have nothing now to compare to the “ tethérichord, monochord, cilhera, and “ right and left-handed (lutes. But whi-“ ther am I wandering? I forget that “ Erudition has not led thee through her “ mazes of scientific lore ; that thou art “but the pupil of Nature, and ignorant “ perhaps of the rules of that art thou pro-“ fessest. And yet the inspired Sappho “ preferred the wild notes of her beautiful “ but ignorant Phaon, to the homage of “ Alceus, tile most elegant poet and mu-“ sician of his day."

“ And had 1 been that Phaon,” said the minstrel, with naïveté, “1 should soon “ have become an Aiceus too ; for Sappho “ would have been at once my inspiration “ and my theme.”

ST. DOMINICK.

125

" Indeed!” said the lady Magdelaine, "with pleasurable surprise; "but per-" haps,” she added with a smile of condescension, "thou hast already tuned thy " lays to the charms of some fair rural " beauty.”

The minstrel sighed, drooped his head, and lightly thrilled on the chords of his harp.

" Do, good my lady,” said Beatrice impatiently, "let him sing the quaint, plea-"sant, and marvellous ballad, of the Merry " Knight and the Maid in the Vestment of "Blue.”

"No,” said the lady Magdelaine languidly, "1 should prefer something in the "Lydian measure, or hypo-Phrygian. I "once witnessed the soothing powers of " the latter. It was a short time before I " left the court, and at the marriage of "the duke de Joyeuse: *Claudin, the

* Vide Dictionnaire de Musique, par Rousseau, article Musique.

12G

THE NOVICE OF

ff modern Timotheus, by playing in the ff Phrygian measure, animated one of the courtiers to such phrenzy, that lie Hew ff to arms in the presence of his sovereign, “ till the cunning minstrel stole him back to reason in the,soothing strains of the “ hypo-Phrygian. Let me then have “ something that soothes the spirits, and “ moves the soul to tender thoughts."

The minstrel bowed, tuned his harp, and, after a symphony of wonderful execution, struck a few low chords, and accompanied the instrument with his voice. It was a voice of no very extensive compass, but it was a voice that breathed the sweetest intimation to the heart; its great charm lurked in the skill witli which it was managed, and the exquisite expression of its tones; every note sighed the spirit of passion, and every word had the energy of a sentiment. His accompaniment was rich, wild, and various; yet the execution of the musician only seconded the ideas of the poet, without over-

ST. DOMINICK,

127

whelming’ the sense by the sound. The measure of his verse was original, and his song was love : lie described the progress of its sensations with the naif simplicity of a novice, who delineated from the consciousness of his newly-awakened feelings ; but it was in the language of a master, who could adorn his subject with all the seducing graces of poetic imagery and fanciful epithet. His sentiments were such as love impresses in the first æra of its empire, but still they were such sentiments as love only produces when acting on the soul of genius and sensibility.

Rapt, agitated, sublimed, his feelings became the sport of his art; and, lost in the sweet delirium which his own vivid imagination awakened, his fingers trembled on the strings ; the harps soft vibration faded into silence, his voice died away to a sigh, and his eyes, beaming with genius and passion, fastened their eloquent glances on Imogen; who, for attitude, expression, and beauty, might have that

jSS

THE NOVICE OF

moment given a model to sculpture or painting for the figure of attention animated by rapture.

One hand was folded on her throbbing bosom, the oilier leaned on her frame, her form bent gently forward, every feature expressive of the rapt enthusiasm that swelled her breast, every glance emanating the visionary raptures that [luctuated in her fancy. The hidden soul of harmony had hitherto laid dormant in the boson; of Imogen : for till now those magic powers that could alone awaken its sympathies were denied her. Oh ! you who have felt a rapture even to agony from the influence of those strains that breathed the soul of passion, of sentiment, of something even more than either; who have in vain attempted, with languishing curiosity, to define the sweet, the overwhelming, and visionary joys that float on the fancy, and collect them into an object of comprehension ; conceive (for you only can conceive) the emotion of the novice, as hanging on

ST. DOMINICK.

129

the minstrel’s witching lay, she felt herself endued with another sense, and her heart throb with sensations to whose existence she was till then a stranger!

Imogen still seemed to listen, though the minstrel had ceased to sing, till her delirium fading away, like the dissolving visions of a blissful dream, left* her involved in a soft and tender melancholy, scarcely less delicious than the raptures which had preceded it.

Although the lady Magdelaine had neither the taste nor judgment to appreciate justly the exquisite musical talent of her secretary, she had vanity enough to construe the sense of his song as an effusion inspired by the charms of his noble mistress; and though the dignified pride of nobility was insufficient to combat the frail weakness of the woman, yet she disguised the fallibility of her heart beneath the coldness of her deportment.

After a slight co nmeadation, she added : a 2



THE NOVICE OF

" I thank tlice for the entertainment thou " hast afforded me ; but the hour devoted "to erudite labour is arrived, and in a "few minutes I shall require thy presence "in my study to instal thee in thy new "avocation.” The minstrel with lowly reverence retired ; and the lady Magde-laine, having given some genera! orders to her women, shortly after left the apartment, telling Imogen she should not that evening have any occasion for her service.

The lady Magdelaine had scarcely closed the door, when the impatient Beatrice eagerly demanded, " Well, mademoiselle, " how like you the minstrel’s singing?”

"Like it! gracious heaven! like it!” repeated Imogen, throwing her arms on her frame, and covering her face with her veil.

"Whythere!” returned Beatrice, much mortified, " 1 thought mademoiselle would "think nothing of it. The moment he "began, I saw he was shame-faced before "my lady. Blessed Rosary! one verse

ST. DOMINICK.

131

“ of the Amorous Shoemaker is worth a thousand such as he sung* now.”

“ For my part,” said Agnes, “I would “as soon have heard old Ambrose con-“ ning over his rubric as such a die-away “ditty, not a word of which 1 under-“ stood.”

“But his eyes!” added Blanche; “who “observed his eyes? and then how the “colour came and went in his cheek, and “ how his hands trembled ! Poor modest “ youth ! I swear I felt for him.”

Tims in chit-chat commentary passed away the rest of the evening, till the supper-bell summoned them to the hall. Imogen remained alone silent and thoughtful ; her arms still rested on her frame, but she had raised her head, and her eyes were fixed on the last beam of the evening sun, as it faded on the height of a distant mountain. The tapestry-room opened on a little covered alley, formed expressly to afford a walk in despite of the weather’s inclemency: thither Imogen bent her steps:

132

THE NOVICE OF

and, seduced by the balsamic freshness of the air and beauty of the evening, she descended a flight of marble steps that led to the terrace beneath. This terrace, which encircled the chateau, was shaded by luxuriant linden-trees, and surrounded by palisadoes ; it commanded a view of the beautiful valley of Nogent, reposing in the shelter of those stupendous mountains whose summits were involved in the mists that rose in sun-tinged columns from their rugged sides. The fantastic finger of eve had thrown her vapoury wreaths on every object, and hung every blossom with a balmy tear. À thousand wayward forms dappled the air, and the still beamy west flushed a rich tint on the softened and indistinct landscape ; while the towers of the chateau, and the distinct spires of the convent of St. Dominick, were already invested with the gloom of an artificial night, flung from the lengthened shades of the forest of Champaigne.

Imogen hung over the palisado, fixed

ST. DOMINICK.

133

lier eyes on the blue waves of the Aisne that glided beneath, and, pursuing their furtive course, extended her gaze to the rich vale through which they rolled. It was a scene finely in unison with her feelings : the air inspired a delicious languor ; she was melancholy, but not unhappy ; pensive, but not mournful ; and to a thousand vague and varying ideas succeeded a train of reflection, which had for its object the past circumstances of her life, her present situation, and future prospects.

“Alas!” sighed Imogen, “memory, “hope, or conviction, arealike unfavourable to the wishes of my heart! An “exemption from every enjoyment the “heart loves, the understanding ratifies; “an alien in sentiment, in feeling, to “ those with whom I am doomed for ever “ to associate ; with a soul too much alive “to those views even reason condemns, I “am wretched, yet scarcely know where-“fore; 1 am unhappy, but dare not com-

134

THE 'NOVICE OF

" plain.” At that moment a nightingale took possession of a tree that shaded the spot where she stood, and poured forth a strain, ‘'most musical, most melancholy.” Silence seemed enamoured of the lay, nor suffered a breeze to sigh its hidden rapture. Imogen listened for a considerable time, silent and delighted; till, involuntarily apostrophising* the charming* songstress, she exclaimed: " Sweet bird! all nature "hangs upon thy thrilling plaint; while "the soft but melancholy privilege of even " sighing away my sorrows is denied me !”

"And canst thou have a sorrow, thy-"self the type of bliss?” said a voice low but distinct.

Imogen started, turned round with a faint exclamation of surprise, and beheld the minstrel. From the impulse of unde-finable timidity and confusion, Imogen would instantly have retired ; but the minstrel’s attitude of graceful supplication, his voice of respectful entreaty, operated with

ST. DOMINICK.

135

her secret wishes to detain her ; yet it was with a modest reluctance that left her determination doubtful.

“If,** said he, “I violate by my presence the sanctity of your secret medications I will instantly retire; but if “ thou (who so sweetly canst deplore thy ‘ own hidden sorrows) art not insensible " to the woes of others, O turn, and suf-“ fer me to enjoy the temporal bliss “chance has invested me with; for it is a “sweet stranger, and my heart welcomes “it with all its liveliest transports.”

<c Art thou too then unhappy ?” demanded Imogen with sympathising earnestness.

“ How shall I answer thee?” said the minstrel, “ or make thee understand that-“ solecism of the heart, by which I feel “ this moment as the happiest, yet per-ct haps the most miserable, of my exist-“ ence? Hitherto my life’s happiness has “ consisted in fugitive minutes, exquisite, “ but few. I revelled in their transient

136

THE NOVICE OF

felicity, yetstill my pleasures multiplied “ in expectation, and memory extolled “ their worth beyond the value of their “ own identity ; while actual fruition “ played lightly o’er each sense, and left “ the heart's aching void unfilled/'

“ Alas !” said Imogen with emotion, c< I do remember me thou hast said thou “ wert an orphan from thy infant state, and haply hast never felt a father's warm ({ embrace, nor known a mother's rap-“ turous caress. The tender kindness of endeared relatives may not have lived ff for thee, nor the sweet recognition of a “ friend awakened thy bosom's transports. “ If so, I pity thee !”

Imogen turned aside her head, and wiped away a tear with her veil. A silence for a moment ensued ; and the minstrel, gazing on her, with a sigh exclaimed :

Such is the pity which angels give to <f suffering man ! yet not for such depri-“ vations thy goodness has enumerated.

ST. DOMINICK.

137

“ let thy pity only flow ; for, oh ! feels ff not the heart a void but what collateral claims can occupy ?—feels not the heart <f a want but what the tie of consanguinity ‘f can obviate ? Oh ! too sure it does !— ff Restless and unquiet, it throbs, it lan-“ guishes for some soft blessing, some cf long-imagined bliss, rather desired than et understood; and wildly palpitates with fond impatience to lavish its glowing “ sensibilities, its overflowing raptures, ff on an object worthy to awaken and re-ff ceive them. Yet pardon me, lady, if, “ all-sainted as thou art, I speak to thee ff in language thy holy ignorance of mor-tal passions will scarcely comprehend. tf Reared in the school of sacred sclf-de-ff niai, where Nature's self, awed into submission by stern Religion’s voice, f‘ resigns her precious influence, and ff leaves the vestal soul to heaven, thou ff canst never have known the pang which “ wrings the heart when it shrinks upon itself in conscious desolation ; when the

13S

THE NOVICE OF

ft glowing- feelings, gasping with raptu-" rous emotion, suddenly chill and wither “ in the want of that sympathy which is ft denied them !”

i( Can 1 not?” exclaimed Imogen emphatically, clasping her hands, and raising her eyes to heaven ; “ O God I how keenly <( have I felt all you have described! I am not the happy but deluded being you “ suppose ; for, oh ! less rich in what I ft possess than poor in my conscious defi-ciency, 1 would gladly exchange my feelings for the apathy I condemn in others, the credulity I compassionate.”

I understand thee,” said the minstrel with energy and delight: “ thy mind has soared beyond the narrow limits of error “ and prejudice; thy heart, unsopliisti-cated by the doctrines of bigotry and superstition, is still rich in all those pre-“ cious feelings which are at once the Ci proudest boast of humanity, the sweet-ce est endowments of nature. And art c<r thou then, thus formed to bless and to

ST. DOMINICK.

139

ff be blessed, doomed to wither out thy life amidst a convent’s solitary gloom? “ Is thy spring of youth to lose its rosy r‘ bloom in fasts and vigils of mistake^ “ piety? And are thy brilliant talents, r‘ thy touching graces, thy mind’s intelli-te gcnce, to live and to decay amidst the “ blighting coldness of ignorant and un-<( congenial associates ?”

Confused, and blushing at the flattery or pleasing truths so artfully conveyed, Imogen replied :

ff I am indeed destined to a monastic ff life—1 have scarcely known any other : yet my days, if exempt from rapture, “ have flowed on in peace; and that life ff which is virtuous can scarcely fail of ct being happy.”

tf O deceive not thyself, sweet saint !” said the minstrel, with a soft smile. “ 5u-ee perior to thy associates, dissevered from <f the world, thine will be such a life of fC solitude as contradicts the purposes of €C Heaven, and hurls defiance to the law of

140

THE NOVICE OF

‘"Providence. Oh! trust me that Na te ture, ever enamoured of the happiness “ which mutual pleasure bestows on her “ children, chills the solitary fruition of undivided bliss. The heart, the tender “ heart, has no self-existing principle of happiness, but reposes upon a thousand f< sweet dependencies for all its raptures ! <f Say, shall 1 not construe thy silence into a tacit coincidence with assertions thy “ own feelings must have often made?— “ Or, if thou art still a sceptic, look on “ thyself with my eyes, and be a convert: “ behold the bright intelligence of that u countenance, those blushes which in-ec vest the throne of genius; those eyes, “ so dangerous in their softness, so be-tf witching in their vivacity; and those “ fugitive graces, which leave the gaze of admiration in sweet suspense where to fc fix a charm which is every where disccr-‘f nible : then wouldst thou say with me, “ Nature never designed so fair a work to grace a convent’s gloomy cell !”

ST. DOMINICK.

141

Overwhelmed, confused, secretly delighted, but apparently displeased, the native delicacy rather than the prudence of Imogen represented toiler the impropriety of listening to such language, in such a situation, and from such a person as now-addressed her, in a strain too grateful not to be dangerous. Almost trembling with emotion, she drew her veil over her face, and said, “ How our conversation has “ wandered so widely from its first point n I know not ; but methinks thou didst “ begin it by invoking my sympathy to “ thy sufferings : judging of them by my r< own, I have more than pitied thee.— “ But see ! the lights already glimmer in “ the casements of the cheateau ; and pro-“ bably the lady Magdelaine will speedily “ require thy attendance in the study.”— Then turning away, she wras slowly retiring, when the minstrel, springing after her, caught her robe.

“ Yet stay !” said be eagerly ; “ for such “ a moment may never again return.”

THE NOVICE Of

'f And what tiicn ?” said Imogen coldly, disengaging her robe.

“ To thee, lady, nothing; but to me— <c for such a moment I would gladly for* Cf feit an age of common-nJace existence.

o	«

Oil, withdraw not from me this fair <f hand, but suffer me to breathe on it those effusions of gratitude thy conde-il scension has already excited."

Forbear, forbear!** exclaimed Imo-gen, with difficulty releasing her hand : rf already hast thou taught me the extent (< of my imprudence, and to repent it.**— She instantly glided away ; and, flying through the alley, entered the tapestry-room, now only faintly lit up by the moonlight, and almost breathless reached her own little apartment. She threw herself on her couch, and, pressing her hand to her heart, as if to check its ardent palpitation, gave a loose to that flow of sweet and novel emotion, that train of interesting and animated reflection, which involved her mind açd flurried her spirits almost to wildness.

feT. DOMINICK,

m

She had for the first time conversed with a being’ whose mind and sentiments, sympathising- with her own, could enter into all the delicate minutiæ of her feelings. She had for the first time participated in that sweet commutation of ideas which forms life’s best blessing, by which the sublimer powers of nature are called into action, and attain the highest perfection the soul can reach. Her mind, hitherto like a fine instrument rich in passive powers, now for the first time vibrated to the magic touch of sympathy ; and her heart unfolded many latent principles of delight, to whose possession she was hitherto a stranger; while fancy and imagination flung their glowing drapery .around those visions of bliss which stole their existence from the consciousness of her newly-awakened feelings. The sanguine joys of youth and inexperience live but in the present; the past and the future are alike given to oblivion ; and sad experience has not yet awakened into life

144

THE NOVICE OF

the suggestions of doubts, the precepts of caution.

Imogen was happy, even to delirium; and, lost in the pleasant illusion to which her whole soul was resigned, the morning dawn broke through her casement ere she pressed a pillow which had hitherto never been the witness of a sleepless night.

CHAP. VII.

Conforme era l’etate

Ma il pensier piu conforme.

Tasso.

Non ; ce n’est ni par choix ni par raison d’aimer, Qu’en voyant ce qui plait on se laisse enflammer. D’uu aveugle penchant la charme imperceptible Frappe, saisit, entraine, et rende un coeur sensible ; Et par un inscrutable et necessaire loi,

On se livre à l’amour sans qu’on sache pourquoi.

T. Corneille.

FOUR days had been allotted for the consistorial visit of the father director at St. Menhoulm ; and three of the four had already expired. The minstrel was not

ST. DOMINICK.

145

only installed in his literary avocation, but proved himself adequate to the task he had undertaken, by a knowledge of the learned languages beyond what might have been expected in the eleemosynary pupil of the brothers of les petits Augustins.

This discovery of the intellectual perfections of her secretary, heightened by the modesty which had concealed it, did not lessen the prepossession his personal graces had awakened in lady Magdelaine's bosom. His influence increased with hourly addition, and his attendance in the study was required at an earlier and protracted to a later moment than had hitherto been usual with the lady Magdelaine herself to devote to her lucubrations.

Imogen’s attendance was less strictly required, and her little desk was removed to a remote corner of the apartment, while the minstrel wrote at the same table with the lady Magdelaine. Imogen was employed in copying from the fathers, or in VOL. I.	H

146

THE NOVICE OF

making extracts from the Lives of the Ten Thousand Martyrs, and the Eleven Thousand Virgins ; while the minstrel transcribed the sentiments of lady Magdelaine on the fervour of holy love, seraphic raptures, and religious transports ; and the lady Magdelaine, in those discussions which so frequently interrupted the labours of her secretary, talked more of Ovid than saint Bonaventnre, and quoted Sappho almost as often as saint Genevieve : accompanying her commentary with a look so relevant to the theme, that the minstrel must have been very deficient in penetration or vanity, not to have observed the abstract devotion of his learned patroness ; who was not a little animated by the presence of a sensible object, as the shrine and statue frequently stimulate that exertion of piety offered to the relic and the saints.

Meantime the novice and the minstrel continued to each other little more than f a shadow to a shade.* Confused and overwhelmed by the consciousness of those

ST. DOMINICK.

147

feelings which had insinuated themselves into her bosom, timid and doubtful of herself, the young* novice of saint Domir nick exchanged tlie infatuating candour and playful ingenuousness of her character, for a reserve, a diffidence, a thousand times more dangerous, and the minstrel, apparently awed into distance by the reserve she assumed, and pursued by the vigilance of lady Magdelaine, only returned her coldness with that

“Silence that speaks, and eloquence of eyes:”

but, constantly associated in the same pursuits, their accordant feelings slumbered not over those fine and impalpable indications of sympathy, which a glance indicated, a blush betrayed.

The fibre of connection which exists between the eye and the soul, served as a conductor to their mutual emotion, and gave the electric spark of passion a mutual influence. This touching silence, this de-

148

THE NOVICE OF

licate and enforced reserve, shed over their sentiments that veil of mystery, in which the dawn of passion loves to enshroud itself, and which the maturity of tenderness ever looks back to with fond regret; yet it was evident the ardent emotions of the minstrel with difficulty brooked the restraint belaboured under; nor could even the awful presence of the lady Magdelaine check those sallies of vivacity, that hyperbole of ironic compliment to her genius, or that sarcastic equivoque, with which he commented on some extraordinary passages in her literary works. Imogen trembled for his temerity : but the minstrel felt he could err with impunity; and, pleased with the privilege, took advantage of the only immunity it could confer, as an indemnification for those of which it deprived him.

Meantime the domestic subjects of Montmorell commented on the enviable situation of the new secretary, withava* riety of observation. The women w ere disappointed, for the harp was laid aside, or

ST. DOMINICK.

149

seldom heard till the family had retired to rest; and then only from the open casement of the minstrel’s apartment. The men complained of upstart airs and affected superiority; and Theodore, the young; page, with a sigh acknowledged, that he hated, envied, and admired him above all human beings ! Such was the political state of the castle, when the father director, on the moment of his return from St. Menhoulm, proceeded to the lady Magdelaine’s apartment ; andin the large green velvet arm-chair, of which he had been the sole occupant for so many years, and close by the easy chair of the lady Magdelaine, beheld the minstrel seated, or rather lolling in an easy attitude, while the lady Magdelaine read aloud the last chapter he had transcribed.

Had a spectre blasted the gaze of father Anselm, his countenance could not have exhibited stronger emotions of surprise, anger, and disappointment: but, accustomed to resist the influence of nature un-

150

THE NOVICE OF

der al] lier variations, the duplicity of his character prevailed ; and with assumed composure he advanced towards the lady Magdelaine, who, receiving him with undisguised confusion, instantly dismissed the minstrel.

Scarce was the friar seated, when the lady Magdelaine entered on a vindication of her conduct in respect to her new secretary, with an eagerness that ever defeats the purpose it is meant to effect ; and availing herself of the equivoque, that she had not received the stranger in his gay profession of a minstrel, but in the sober avocation of a secretary, hoped to make her peace with the director for the violation of her promise, and her disregard of those admonitions which he had so strongly pointed against the minstrel’s longer residence at the chateau.

The friar received her excuse in silence, and immediately turned the conversation on another topic, without a single commentary on that which had been just dis-

ST. DOMINICK.

151

cussed ; while the lady Magdelaine, surprised and delighted by a silence which she construed into a perfect coincidence with her wishes, put a purse into his hands, when he arose to retire, to distribute, she said, as his judgment and charity should direct, but in reality to reward an acquiescence so little expected.

The friar had no sooner disappeared, than she sent for her new favorite with a confidence she had not experienced since his inauguration. Three successive days

flew

VO r* *	1 ~	-*	•

*o|»itj!y tlYt’iiy ,

s* : v | ]	ro,

I/IÎV^ v» • ..	>.^.o	»»	\y«	v	i	v^1

illumined in the province, and political discussion seemed for an interval to usurp the place of that strong partiality and aversion the minstrel had awakened in the bosoms of the lady Magdelaine and her confessor ; while a thousand favourable and precious chances secured to the minstrel the happiness of beholding or conversing with the novice of St. Dominick. One morning, after a long and perhaps wearisome conference with the father director, the lady

152

THE NOVICE OF

Magdelaine sent for her amanuensis into the study ; and, not disposed for composition, she put the Confessions of St. Augustin into his hands, and reclined on a couch while her )oung secretary ready aloud those self-reprobations of the good bishop of Hippo, which present such a struggle between grace and passion, piety and nature: and already had he made a considerable progress in the detail of human frailty, which the sincerity rather than the prudence of the saint betrayed, when the door flew open, and the friar appeared pushing in Imogen before him, and pointing towards a paper he held in his hands.—“ Be-“ hold, madam/’ said he, “ the pious ef-“ fusions of a novice of the holy order of “ St. Dominick, whose inspirations, though of a late date, and whose theme,—”

“ Father!” interrupted Imogen wildly, the shining moisture of her eye swelled to the tear of passion, her face and neck covered with blushes, and every feature despoiled of its sweet and tranquil exprès-

6T. DOMINICK.

153

sion ;—f‘ father, restore me that paper: it <c is mine ; intended for no eye but mine; cf and to expose those secret though in-consequent thoughts you have forcibly “ possesed yourself of, is equally a breach tc of principle and honour.”

Principle and honour,” said the friar sarcastically, “ well become the lips of “ one who meditates the violation of every “ sacred vow, tramples on the modest de-corums of her sex, and perverts those rf gifts with which Providence has endowed “ her, to—”

“ Father,” again faintly interrupted Imogen, ff "tis impossible to defend what

<c is not even understood ; but---”

“ Such deficiency of comprehension is €t convenient,” said the friar, with a sneer > “ but to speak more unequivocally, I “ should have said that this new object of “ your poetic devotion, in engrossing that “ time, those talents, and those medita-tf tions, which should only be used to the

“ glory of God,-----”

H 2

154

THE NOVICE OF

"What new object?” demanded the lady Magdelaine, almost breathless.

ff O father,” exclaimed Imogen, eagerly interrupting his reply, fr thou wouldst “ not have me believe any act of mine “ can in aught add to or detract from the " glory of supreme perfection ? there is t( impiety in the thought.”

" Away !” said the friar: " no more “ will I listen to the caviling of thy pue-<c rile though profane sophistry :	go	to

“ thy chamber, and invoke the saints in “ thy behalf; for the spirit of heresy is “ fastened on thee, and drags thee towards “ eternal perdition !”

“ Merciful heaven !” exclaimed the minstrel, starting forward with uncontrouled emotion, and pointing towards Imogen ; lc look on that countenance, father ; behold <f in it the image of divinity itself, the inviolable sanctity of virtue; listen to “ the sentiments which flow from those “ pure lips; compare them with theblame-“ less excellence of the life they illustrate ;

ST. DOMINICK.

155

“ then threaten this guileless, this perfect “ being with eternal destruction, if you " dare !”

“ If I dare !” retorted the friar, a livid hue overspreading his countenance, his whole frame convulsed with agitation ; then, after a successful struggle of a moment, he added in a tone of resignation, and smiting his breast, “dare! but it is “ well. Suffer me, lady, to retire ; thy “ castle, I well foresee, can no longer afford “ a safe and honourable asylum to thy “ poor beadsman ; insulted, bearded, even “ in thy presence, let not the meekness of “ the Christian sully the dignity of my holy “ vocation.” Then with a look of humble resignation he let his crosier fall within his arms, raised his eyes to heaven, and retired in silence.

The faculties of the lady Magdelaine seemed bound, as by the spell of magic. The oblique hints of the friar, so pregnant with mortification, so capable of insinuating the poison of jealousy, though only

156

THE NOVICE OF

expressed oy self-interest, to awaken distrust ; the temerity of the minstrel, in boldly avowing* himself the champion of the apostate novice, including* in his vindication so many personal eulogiums and enthusiastic praises; and the sudden departure of her director ; left the lady Mag-delaine forsome time, not only immoveable but speechless : at length, recovering in some degree from the influence of her overwhelming emotions, she cast an angry glance at the minstrel, and exclaimed with affected calmness, “ Although vulgar in-ff dignation loves to deal in elipsis and ec aposiophesis, philosophy disdains the Ian-<c guage of passion, norcan even hypocrisy <c or ingratitude rouse it from its perpetual €s calm. Yet thy temerity, young stranger, €t might well sanction such evident resent-<c ment as was displayed by the philoso-** pher Phyre, the Elean, who pursued “ his cook even to the market place, with <c a spit in his hand, for a trifling offence : yet I will only admonish thee, that thy

ST. DOMINICK.

157

“ further residence at Montmorell de-c‘ pends upon the prudent circumspec-“ tion of thy conduct, and the respect “ and deference thou payest to that holy a man, whose sacred character, but now, “ thou daredst to insult : but as for thee, <f insidious serpent, whose mind has as “ many cunning devices, as a chileagonum

has angels----”

Imogen, who till now stood overwhelmed and silent, raised her timed glances, and attempted to interrupt the lady Magde-laine : whose philosophy, however becomingly observed towards the minstrel, seemed now nearly reduced to the same ebb as that of the sage of Elea ; while her stern eye, turned towards the beautiful countenance of the novice, stole from thence new fuel for her rage.

“ Peace !” cried the lady Magdelaine, ff I will not be imposed on by thy dupli-“ city : to-morrow restores thee to thy l< convent ; there thou wilt have time to

158

THE NOVICE OF

“ reflect on thy ingratitude, and to repent “ it.”

The tear which had fallen on the cheek of Imogen dried on its glowing surface ; the fire of indignant pride flashed from her languid eye ; and she retired in silence, and with an air of native dignity, which, opposed to the affected hauteur of the lady Magdelaine, marked the vast difference between the inborn greatness of the soul, and the ostentatious pride of a mean and self-sufficient mind. Almost at the same moment the lady Magdelaine quitted the apartment, in order to follow the friar, and deprecate the wrath of a being who, raised from nothing by her ill-bestowed bounty, had obtained an influence over her mind and actions she had neither the penetration to discover nor the power to obviate ; leaving her new favorite, as she believed, to “ chew the food €t of sweet and bitter fancy,” and to repent the temerity which she wished him to suppose had nearly forfeited her favor

ST. DOMINICK.

159

for ever. Nothing, however, was farther from the favorite’s thoughts : his eye had for some time impatiently dwelt on the paper he had seen fall from the friar’s trembling hands, and which he supposed contained the subject of Imogen’s accusation ; and no sooner had the lady Magde-laine left the apartment, than he eagerly gathered up the fragments, which had been the efficient cause of the foregoing scene. It was so torn and defaced, probably in the struggle between the friar and the novice, that it would have been illegible to any eye but that which now endeavoured to devour its contents:	it

contained a few unfinished stanzas, of some poetical merit. That they were addressed to himself, although he believed never intended for his inspection, the minstrel soon discovered; and that they flowed with the warmest sentiments of admiration, he was not long in developing. The poetess at once professed his genius to be the theme of her song, and the mo-

160

THE NOVICE OF

del of her imitation : she dwelt with enthusiasm on the charm that lurked in his lyre, and the spell that breathed in his voice. She personified him as the genius of minstrelsy ; and, under the sanction of her own fanciful image, worshipped him she had immortalized !—while her heart, trembling for the ardor of her imagination, frequently appeared to check its daring flights ; and her modesty, suspect-ingthe treachery of her heart, veiled with a timid hand the warmth of its glowing dictates.

The minstrel would have regretted that this little effusion had been left unfinished, could any regret have insinuated itself into a heart overwhelmed by those rapturous emotions which the first conviction of awakened reciprocal admiration, and delighting those with whom we have long been delighted, excites: rapt, intoxicated, he read the unfinished address, not once, but twenty times; while the heart and vanity of the man were too highly gratified

ST. DOMIKICK.

161

to suffer the judgment of the critic to exert its powers unbiaed by partiality, uninfluenced by self-love. The poem, therefore, was exquisite, and the poetess more than ever divine !

Imogen had fled from the lady Magde-laine’s apartment to her own, where she passed the remainder of the day in tears. Her proud heart swelled with indignation at the unmerited severity she had been treated with before the minstrel; and every delicate and refined feeling recoiled on itself, and agonized to the recollection of those oblique hints which the friar let fall of her partiality to the young stranger; trembling with apprehension lest the subject of her poetical inspiration should behold a witness that might be construed into the strongest confirmation of the friar’s surmises ; and recollecting that the friar had dropped her little poem, although her agitation on leaving the room had prevented her executing the intention of securing it, she hastily rose and fled to lady

162

THE NOVICE OF

Magdelaine’s study, in the hope of still finding it there ; but the most diligent search was fruitless.

Disappointed and low-spirited, she was returning to her apartment, when the reviving freshness of the evening air drew her towards the open casement of the gallery through which she passed. It was the hour of vespers ; all the family, herself excepted, were still in the chapel, and the castle was involved in a solemn silence that corresponded with the scene which at once attracted her naze and snoke nparp to i^r

o	i r	*,v*

wounded spirits.

The sun was setting with uncommon splendor; and the clouds, concentrating on their surface a thousand vivid rays, sometimes assumed the appearanceof floating mountains, emitting from their luminous points flashes of living gold, and sometimes streaming like meteors through the deep blue of the glowing atmosphere. Scarce a breeze panted on the verdant foliage; and the spirit of peace seemed to

ST. DOMINICK,

163

expand its pennons o’er the soft solemnity of the hour ; while the crescent moon, already displaying her silver horn, bathed her beams in the waters of the Aisne, whose bosom was darkened by the lengthening shadows of the castle’s lofty turrets. It was a scene finely in unison w ith the feelings of Imogen : her eyes dwelling on the glories of the creation, a religious rapture diffused itself around her; and with all her glowing emotions “ thick about her,” she bent one kee to the ground, and offered up that incense of the heart “ whose fragrance smells to heaven/*

Her spirits calmed, lier feelings sublimed, by this pious indulgence of her soul’s grateful effusions, she arose to retire, when turning round she perceived the minstrel leaning against a pillar near the spot where she stood. He darted forward to detain her, as w ith a hurried pace she was retiring.

Not by a sigh/’ said he, catching the drapery of her robe, not even by a sigh,

164

THE NOVICE OF

“ would I violate the sanctity of thy holy “occupation; yet now thy orieons to “heaven are finished, turn, fair saint, and “grant that hearing to another which but “now haply thou invokest for thyself.” Surprise and confusion for a moment held Imogen in suspense whether to obey the dictates of her prudence or her wishes ; and the minstrel, taking advantage of her dubious silence, led her gently back, and continued :	“	May	heaven	grant	thy	pe-

“ tition, as thou hast acceded to mine ; “ and may happiness be as liberally be-“ stowed on thee as thou hast power to “ bestow it on others !”

“ Mine were not prayers of supplica-“ tion,” said Imogen smiling, “ but the “ effusions of the heart, grateful for bless-“ ings conferred, throbbing with rapture <£ and delight.”

“Such then be mine!” said the minstrel with impassioned earnestness; “and here “ on this beauteous hand suffer me to offer “up the effusions of a heart, grateful in-

ST. DOMINICK.

165

“ indeed for blessings conferred, yet still “ presumptuous^ claiming/’

Imogen in confusion snatched away her band, and would have instantly withdrawn ; but the minstrel, again catching the drapery of her robe, exclaimed : “ For-“give, oh ! forgive the temerity of an imprudent, who, borne away by the impetuosity of those feelings your presence “is but too much calculated to inspire, “ finds even the respect he owes you inadequate to resist their influence.”

“I entreat,” said Imogen faintly, “you “will suffer me to retire.”

“ If,” continued the minstrel, “ I bear “ about me some secret cause of your too “evident antipathy, suffer me to with-“ draw ; but oh ! let me not intrude upon “ those sweet meditations of a refined and “ superior mind, or banish thee from the “contemplation of a scene so beautiful “and sublime; so congenial to a taste “alive to all that is most exquisite in “ either ; a scene where a moral interest

166

THE NOVICE OF

“attracts the heart, and pensive memory “ loves to identify that spot sacred to Eloisa “and Abelard.”*

“To Eloisa and Abelard !” returned Imogen starting.

“ Behold/’ continued the minstrel, artfully fascinating her attention, and insensibly drawing her back to the casement, “behold that mountain, whose base the “moon’s fantastic light now silvers; be-“neath its sheltering height repose the “ mouldering ruins of the Paraclete.” “Alas!” said Imogen, with awakened enthusiasm, “why has the knowledge of a “circumstance so interesting been so long “ denied me ?”

“ Because,” said the minstrel, “ thy “ unkind destiny has thrown thee among “ those, who, dead to the finer feelings “ of the soul, reject the higher joys which

* The Paraclete monastery was founded, in the diocese of Troyes, Champagne, by Abelard, who was interred with Eloisa in an adjoining monument.

ST. DOMINICK.

167

“ taste and fancy give ; whose barren “ hearts, wrapt in their own self-adoring “ pride, ne’er stole a pleasure save what “ self-love inspired ; and whose contract-<f ed minds, deceived by pious fraud, seek “ heaven on motives as selfish as the tf means they pursue to attain their end “ are childish and puerile. But, O sweet “ enthusiast Î thou whom genius, fire, nurture, warms; whom thought, feeling, “ and taste, raise in the scale of thinking “beings even above thy species; ’tis for C( thy rapt fancy to consecrate the scene “ sacred to departed genius; 'tis for thy “ warm sensible heart to pay the homage “ of a sigh o’er the spot sacred to the re-“ membrance of unequalled but unfortu-“ nate love.”

The gratified ambition, the gratified heart of Imogen sent a glow to her cheek as she replied :

“ In the stillness of a fine evening, “ when the setting sun had flung his glow-“ing beams on those picturesque ruins

168

THE NOVICE OF

'‘which skirt the mountain’s base, it “ should seem that an intuitive something “ led me to their contemplation ; and my “ eager gaze has dwelt on them till fancy’s “ mimic powers peopled the deserted “shades with forms wild and fantastic, “ and gave to every mouldering dome, “ to every ruined cloister, an appropriate “ inhabitant.”

“And yet,” said the minstrel with a sigh, “that scene of savage desolation was “once the sad retreat of youth, beauty, “ and genius ; of love unsubdued, of pas-“ sion too potent for reason, or even religion, to conquer. It was beneath the “shelter of that wild and gloomy valley “ the unfortunate and enamoured Abelard “ fixed the last residence of his heart’s “idol. He sought a scene congenial to “the sombre temper of his own feelings, “ and the unerring sympathy of love “taught him to believe in unison with “ those of his wretched mistress. Per-“ haps as he watched the progress of that

ST. DOMINICK.

169

“ gloomy pile, tomb of his joys ! as he “ wandered in the restless agitation of “ despairing love amidst those savage “scenes, helms fixed his-eye upon that “silver orb that now fascinates our gaze, “ and exclaimed, as 1 do now, ‘ Beautiful “ planet ! witness of my passion and my “ woes! here on this spot haply thou shalt “ fling thy beams upon my love, and illu-“ mine her dreary path of midnight medi-“ tation, when far from this abode of peace “ the wretched Abelard, pursued by envy, “ persecuted by malice, shall consume a “ life of wretchedness, for ever lost to love “and happiness !’ ” The minstrel, in agitation, paused, and fixed his impassioned gaze on the tearful eyes of Imogen, who with a profound sigh ejaculated, “Alas! “unhappy Abelard!”

The minstrel took her unresisting hand, and in a softened voice exclaimed : “You '“weep, you sigh ; for Abelard’s unhappy “destiny you sigh. Give then, lovely “maid, thy tears, thy sighs to me; for

YOL. I.	I

170

THE NOVICE OF

“his suffering's are mine,, but not his “joys. Misery raised not her bitter cup “to his lip till he had quailed the rosy “ draught of bliss to its last precious drop. “ He loved, and was beloved. Destiny “ divided him from the object of his tenderness, but her passion survived the “ power of absence : living he was adored, “ and in death united to her. But oh ! it “is only for him to complain who has “never felt the transport of reciprocal “ passion ; whose ardent glowing feelings “ prey on themselves ; and whose tender “ impassioned heart is consumed by a “sacred, secret, unrequited love !”

“ And is that possible?” said Imogen in a faultering accent; “can a heart, can a “soul, capable of such profound emotion, “ such refined tenderness, such delicate “and proud reserve, throb with unrequited “ passion ?”

“ *Tis for you to decide,” said the minstrel, dropping on one knee: “Imogen “ beloved as soon as seen ! Imogen, these

e ST. DOMINICK.

171

" moments are furtive as they are precious ; "they will admit of no studied detail of " passion,, nor can I tell thee aught the "sweet intimations of the heart have not "whispered thee. Perish the love that "calls on cold formal declarations to bc-" tray its existence ! Perish those affections which every motion, every "glance, every word, does not testify! "Oh, Imogen, remove that envious veil. " I ask not for confirmation, but for " hope ; I ask not to violate the reserve " of thy sacred delicacy, but to suppli-" cate thy compassion : turn then not " from me those eyes ; let me read in " them the movements of thy soul, let " them be the arbiters of my fate, let their "beams give life to my hopes, or banish " me from thee for ever !’*

The minstrel, with the timid hand of love, drew aside the gauze which veiled the face of Imogen. Then her full eye met hi3, her frame trembled, she leaned on the minstrel's shoulder for support ; she wept

172

THE NOVICE OK

but wept delicious tears ; and Joy might bave purchased with his best smile the sigh that stole from her lip.

The minstrel gazed on her fora moment in speechless extacy, and Silence seemed enamoured of the pause which Rapture had created. Imogen was the first to destroy the sweet illusion : she started from the supporting arm of the minstrel, cast around a quick and fearful glance, then uttered a'faint scream, and would have fled. The minstrels circling arm detained her. “ Merciful heaven !” said he, “in a “ moment such as this, whence this strong cs emotion of terror ? Does Imogen repent “a condescension too dubious for even “love’s ardent .wishes to construe into “ more than pity ?”

“Didst thou not see nor hear any thing?” said Imogen trembling.—“ What should “ I see or hear but Imogen ? Have I at “ this moment a sense, a thought, a feeling cc that is not all Imogen ?”

“ As heaven is my witness, I beheld the

ST. DOMINICK.

173

,f lady Magdelaine and the father director "glide from behind that pillar, and go ff out at that door.”

"Indeed!” said the minstrel, thoughtfully.

A faint ejaculation from the novice (who reeled towards a pillar) was all the answer he received ; and at the same moment he found himself violently seized by the collar, and surrounded by some of the domestics of the chateau, with the friar aad lady Magdelaine, who exclaimed, " Seize the traitor ! bear him instantly to " the western towrerB The servants obeyed ; the minstrel struggled, and opposed their efforts with Herculean strength; but overcome by numbers, as they tore him away be fixed bis eyes on Imogen, (who, the living* image of terror, still clung to the pillar for support,) and as he'passed her, wildly exclaimed, " Heaven guard "and protect thee, thou suffering excellence, from the persecuting spirit of envy " and oppression ! and oh!”—Ere he could

TUB NOVICE OF

finish the sentence he was dragged away, and Imogen fell lifeless to the earth.

CHiLI». VIZI»

And shall I here abide the shot Of angry eyes, not comforted to live.

But that there is this jewel in the world That I may see again ?

SlIAKSPEABE.

Ah dolente partita

Ah piu della mia vita

Da te parte, e non moro, e pur io provo

La pena della morte

E sento nel partire

tin vivace morire ;

Cji’ella vita al dolore

Per fa che moja iramortalmente il euore.

INTEREST was in the breast of the father Anselm the universal dissolvent, .before which every other passion and sentiment disappeared. Nothing had been further from his mind than to quit the chateau de Montmorell, and leave his young competitor in undisturbed possession of all

ST. DOMINICK.

175

those precious immunities lie had himself so long been endowed with; yet still with well-timed policy he secluded himself from the presence of the lady Magdelaine, nor could she obtain from the haughty and self-sufficient priest the audience of a moment until., returning from vespers, she entreated a moment’s conversation with him relative to the circumstances of the morning; and the father, feigning an intention of going that night to a friary of his own order on the skirts of the forest, refused to enter the chateau until he received her promise that the minstrel should be dismissed from it the following morning. But the friar had hitherto only to contend with the head of lady Magdelaine ; he had now for the first time to enter the lists with her heart; and when a woman’s heart is reduced even to the last extremity, her ingenuity seldom fails to bring in a corps dc reserve to its assistance.

ff My dear father,” said the lady Magdelaine, “ your better judgment is for

■176

THE NOVICE OF

“ once overshot by your unsuspecting ff simplicity ; far from turning- this young stranger adrift, let us secure him a pri-fC soner, until we can make some discovery of what he is; for my mind mis-“ gives me he is other than his seeming “betokens: times such as these sanction “ every suspicion, and—”

The lady Magdelaine made a sudden pause, caught the friar by the arm, and

stopped beneath a casement, from whence

•

the minstrels voice distinctly issued.. Five minutes breathless attention to the conversation of the minstrel, which in the stillness of the evening reached her ears, deprived the lady Magdelaine not only of her philosophic coolness, but her Christian equanimity. Her sallow check glowed with the rage of jealousy, her eyes flashed fire ; she hurried into'the chateau, followed by the triumphant friar, and as she passed through the great hall, ordered some of the domestics to accompany her instantly to the gallery, to seize on the

ST. DOMINICK.

177

minstrel, and confine him in the western tower till they received further orders. The command was uttered with feudal sternness^ and obeyed with feudal exactitude.

The lady Magdelaine retired to her apartment in agitation too violent to escape the observance of the friar, who no longer insisted on going* thatevening to the friary of the Cistercian brothers.

Neither the discovery of the minstrel at Imogen’s feet, which she had herself witnessed, the mortifying blow her vanity had received, nor the arguments of the friar, were sufficient to counteract the partiality which the young secretary had awakened in the heart of his patroness. Her passion, like other propensities of dotage, increased by opposition ; and, with a fondness almost childish, grew wayward and testy as its darling wishes were opposed.

The morning after the minstrel’s confinement, the friar, attended by a number of the domestics, was dispatched to lead

L7S

THE NOVICE OF

the young culprit into the presence of the offended lady, to be tried for the high crime and misdemeanor of preferring youth, beauty, and genius, to age, ugliness, and pedantry ; for, notwithstanding the well-feigned suspicions by which she meant to temporize with the aversion and prejudice of the friar, the lady Magde-laine had no fault to find with the min^ strel, no suspicion to satisfy, save what envy and jealousy gave birth to. Neither the rigid nerves or composed pulses of the philosophess could withstand the agitation the expected appearance of the minstrel excited; and footsteps approaching her study-door gave a new throb to her heart when the friar entered, followed by her other emissaries, who, with countenances full of importance, all seemed eager to speak.

I congratulate you, madam,” said the friar: “ your dangerous guest is fled. The rf criminality of his intentions anticipated

ST. DOMINICK.

179

ff your scrutiny, and he fled from that retribution his hypocrisy and ingratitude merited. ”

“ Fled !” repeated the lady Magdelaine, pale with surprise and disappointment; rr fled ! impossible! the door locked and cc the key in my possession!”

i( But the window was but ill secured,’ said the friar: “ we found one of the bars wrenched away, and a breach made in the frame ; and though its height is con-{{ siderable. desperation is not tobeintimi-c< dated by probable dangers, when certain peril awaits it ” “ Besides, with humble deference,” said Ambrose, bowing, “ there is no coping with conjuration ; and “ if this same monsieur troubadour had not ff been deep in the black art, he could never have set our damsels’ wits adrift with his roundelays and romances; nor, with all humility be it spoken, would he have got into such marvellous great fa-f< vour with my lady, who set her face

ISO

THE NOVICE OF

ff against him, as one may say, from the beirinnins:.”

o	O

<c Peace !” interrupted the lady Magde-laine, glad to have an opportunity of venting her stifled rage on her servants, whom she now accused as the efficient cause of the minstrel’s reception at the chateau, and whose ne^li^ence had favored his es-

O O

cape. Then suddenly recollecting herself, she eagerly demanded who had seen the demoiselle Imogen that morning ? and, without waiting for an answer, dispatched a messenger for her.

When Imogen had recovered from the state of insensibility into which she had fallen in the gallery, surrounded by darkness, and a prey to the most dreadful impressions, she with difficulty crept to her own apartment, and, flinging herself on her couch, passed the night in that variety of emotion which the circumstances of the evening were'calculated to inspire : yet amidst the train of fears, doubts, and ap-

ST. DOMINICK.

181

prehensions that floated on her mind, one smiling sentiment was still buoyant ; and to its sweet solace her harassed thoughts still turned for repose, and found felicity supreme and unalloyed. Imogen, the young, the enthusiastic, the sensible and tender Imogen, loved and was beloved ! Could Imogen be otherwise than happy, in spite of the gloomy visions her timid fancy conjured to scare her hopes? Yet the blush which this delicious consciousness brought to her cheek faded to a death-like paleness, when Beatrice, who brought the lady Magdelaine’s commanding message, informed her the minstrel had fled.

O 3

“ Holy mother! but it is a strange cf world 1” said Beatrice : “ it is, as Am-{C brose says, nothing but ups and downs. “Here is the minstrel, that was every “ thing yesterday, is nothing to-day. But et they say it was not for nothing either “ my lady confined him in the western

tower. Some say he was a Ilugonot fc and an unbeliever ; others say he was

182

THE NOTICE OF

“ a traitor; but most folk seem to think " he was a Jew or conjurer; and Ber-c‘ nardine swears he heard a dap ofthun-der, that shook tii • whole chateau, just rc as the great clock struck twelve ; which brings to my mind the story of the old e‘ astrologer who threw himself into the ct moat. Thus it was, mademoiselle : it “ was the eve of St. Maxima, just after I came from Provence with my old uncle “ to the chateau. I remember I had on my tawny-orange fardingale, which had “ been only once scoured, and”—With a profound sigh Imogen interrupted her, to enquire if lady Magdelaine knew of the minstrel’s escape ?

“ Christ! have I been chattering like a jay all this time, and quite forgot that Theodore desired me to tell you my lady commands you instantly to the study.— f‘ I fancy ’tis about something very extraordinary ; so if you will have the “■ goodness to leave the least bit of the " door open—”

ST. DOMINICK.

183

“ Dear Beatrice,” said Imogen in tears, cannot you make some excuse for me? el Indeed I cannot appear before the lady “ Magdelaine.’*

“ Dear mademoiselle, not I ; I could tc not make an excuse if I was to die for “ it; and yet you know I would go to the rf end of the world to oblige you ” While Beatrice was still speaking, Theodore himself tapped at the door with a second message ; and Imogen, pale and trembling, was forced to obey.

She found the lady Magdelaine alone ; who, with a brow contracted by unusual severity, and a voice almost inarticulate from rage, commanded her instantly to relate all the conversation that had passed between the minstrel and herthe preceding evening in the gallery; but tears and blushes were all the answer she could obtain.

“ It is then as I suspected,” exclaimed the lady Magdelaine; “and a novice of fi the holy order of St. Dominick was on

181

THE NOVICE OF

the point of becoming the prey of her own weak and foolish vanity, and the tf artful seductions of a low-born villain !” She then loudly expatiated on the imprudence, indecorum, and ingratitude, of Imogen’s conduct; and, hurried away by the influence of jealousy and disappointment, for once descended from the accustomed trope, figure, and metaphor, of her high-flown rhetoric, to speak in the more forcible and poignant language of tfawo-“ man scorned and, after a reproof and an exordium of an hour long, the all-enduring Imogen was sent back to her room, with the terrific threat of being immediately removed to the convent, and represented in her true colours to the abbess and ihe nuns.

Happily, however, for the lady Magde-laine, her amatory, like her religious, propensities required a visible object to inspire and perpetuate their ardors. Neither her faith nor her love were founded upon ihose spiritualised sentiments which

ST. DOMINICK.'

185

could enable them to exist in mere conception or belief; and if the picture of a saint was necessary to stimulate her piety,, the presence of the young* stranger was requisite to perpetuate the tenderness he had awakened. It was not then to be wondered at that in a few days her heart resumed its wonted callosity, the friar his boundless influence ; that the foundation of the monastery was again an object of interest, and the Crusades pursued with accustomed vigor. Even Imogen was again reinstated in the honors of the es-crutoire, and her profession put off until the Crusades should be finished, which were now hastening to a conclusion ; while poor St. Bonaventure claimed his old station to the discomfiture of Ovid, and the Odes of Sappho were resigned in honor of the Miracles of St. Theresa.

The castle again resumed its wonted tranquil uniformity; and the adventure of the extraordinary stranger, whose presence, like a blazing meteor, spread tern-

186

THE NOVICE OF

porary confusion, amazement, and admiration, was now ranked among the established tales and gossip stories “ told by the

winter fire,” and wondered at as often as told.

Love knows no inequality ; it discovers in,or bestows on, its objectevery thing that excites interest or constitutes perfection. The sympathies of the heart are deaf to the arbitrary suggestions of pride ; and even the disadvantages of birth or fortune serve but as basso relievo, which raise their possessor superior to destiny, and mark him the favorite of heaven, though reckless of the world’s perishable treasures.

Never for a moment had Imogen reflected that the minstrel held a rank in the world which at that period was neither respected nor eligible ; that he was a foundling,a wanderer, and, lastly, the hired servant of the lady Magdelaine ; still less had she confounded him with the domestics of the chateau. With whom indeed could she assimilate him? for with her he

ST. DOMINICK.

187

held a distinct place in the creation, and from the moment she first beheld him he appeared more than human, and every one else appeared less.

The ne\r, the profound, the sweet emotions, which had influenced the flow and ebb of her reflections during the minstrel’s residence at the chateau, now only at intervals thrilled on her heart; while the pensive sadness of disappointed hope, of disappointed love, hung its perpetual gloom o’er the mind, the manners, the brow of the novice: and though constitutional vivacity sometimes lured a smile to her lip, the heart’s dejection ever pursued the lovely stranger with a tear; and yet, enamoured even of her misery, since it was remotely connected with all she had ever known of bliss, she cherished the source of heraflliction, nor would have exchanged her present sufferings for all the calm of lier former indifference.

There are rapturous sentiments, rapturous recollections, that can only be too

T1IE NOVICE or

ISS

dearly purchased when virtue is the prise, Imogen had known them, yet Imogen was innocent: she therefore suffered acutely, but patiently. “And can one so easily “part with what one so dearly loves ?” said she one morning, ns she sat thinking on the minstrel's sudden flight; “if so, “then it is not love I feel," No witness is requisite to excite the blush of refined sensibility. Imogen started at the thought, which had not escaped her lips, but her heart, and hid her face in her veil, to conceal her blushes even from herself. Then, hurrying from the reflection, she attempted to account for that sudden departure of the minstrel, which had awakened it. “ What-“ ever were the accusations,” said she, “the lady Magdelaine had to allege “ against the amiable young stranger, they “were of a mysterious nature, for they “still remained locked up within her own “ breast. Although they must have been “the cause of his departure, yet wrould I “stake all that is dearest to me on earth

ST. DOMINICK.

1S9

“ lie was innocent; for oh! surely guilt “never hung- her gloom on a brow like “his, nor vice polluted the soul of one “whose sentiments breathe the spirit of “ virtue !”

This was indeed the conclusion of an inexperienced and enamoured heart; for the sentiments of the aenius are not al-ways illustrative of the principles of the man. But Imogen, fertile in excuses to calm those doubts appearances sanctioned of the innocence of him whom it was misery supreme to believe culpable, established the confirmation of her wishes on a stronger foundation : “I have seen little “ of the world/’ said she ; “ yet, from the “little I have seen, and from all I have “ read, I have learnt that happiness and “ virtue have no inseparable'connection ; “that extraordinary merit ever excites “envy, and seldom escapes persecution; “and that the sufferings, the dissensions “of mankind arise less from their vices /than from their errors and prejudices :•

190

THE NOVICE OF

“else why does the page of history teem “ with the virtuous and magnanimous acts “of a few heroic individuals, who lived “but for the good of mankind, and died “the victims of ils ingratitude and persecution? Why lias philosophy shrunk “beneath the oppression of prejudiced “ignorance, and genius, unnoticed and “unknown, pined in want and lived In “ wretchedness ? Alas ! it is not requisite “to be criminal to suffer the punishment “ due to vice/'

The minstrel was therefore not only innocent but injured ; and this self-drawn conclusion shed a new interest o’er that he had already awakened, and tw ined another ligament round the heart of Imogen. That warm and tender heart now reposed all its hopes of happiness on either hearing from the object of its secret homage, or in sketching such wild and fanciful plans of future bliss as the young imagination loves to colour with its warmest tints. Each tlay as it fled left behind it a new shade of

ST. DOMINICK.

191

regret in the spirits of the novice, for every day and every hour fancy promised some tidings of the minstrel ; and the heart, willingly receiving the grateful illusion, expiated its credulity by the pangs of conséquent disappointment.

Sometimes, hurried away by the vivacity of her wi-hes, she would ascend the ramparts of the castle, full of vague expectations that the first object that would salute her eye from the plain below would be the minstrel himself, returning with full power to clear his character from every aspersion, and reinstate himself in the favour of lady Magdelaine; but after a long eager gaze, the desolation of civil war gave no object to her view but ruined villages, uncultivated fields, or fugitive peasants, flying for security to the impervious wilds of the forest, and distant parties of the military, which overran the provinces in every direction: and if their picturesque appearance as they scoured those once-srniling

192

THE NOVICE OF

scenes they had desolated, their beamy spears, shiningarmour, and wavingplumes, amused her imagination, her heart denied its interest; and among- the tears which stained her cheek for her own private sufferings, one drop ennobled their source for her country’s woes !

One evening, returning from the ramparts, she passed near the door of the apartment once occupied by the minstrel, and heard, or fancied she heard, the tones of his harp, as she was wont when in a still evening he played at his open casement, at first she deemed it but an illusion of her senses; but as she approached, the sound more distinctly caught her ear. Panting and breathless with indescribable emotion, she ventured to open the door, and beheld----the page, seated at the foot of the

bed, and playing on the minstrel’s harp. At the sight of Imogen he started, blushed, and rose to lay by the instrument. Imogen disappointed she knew not why, and

ST. DOMINICK.

m

blushing she knew not wherefore, apologised for her intrusion, and said with a smile :

“ I did not know thou wert a musician, ct Theodore/'

Nor am I, mademoiselle ; but it is na-“ tural to imitate what we admire.”

“ Oh most natural,” sighed Imogen.

“ 1 envied the minstrel for many reasons,” said Theodore, casting down his eyes, “ and not a little for his charming “ musical talent, 1 have listened to him <e of a fine night, when he played on the “ terrace under your window, until I wept “ like an infant. It is strange, made-" moiselle, that one should weep as much “ from pleasure as from pain; nay, some-“ times Inore,,, ff Such tears are delicious!” said Imogen, gazing on the harp, over which the page leaned.

Yes,” said Theodore, answering her looks, u this was his harp ; and there,” pointing to the bed, <c lies his minstrel’s VOL, I,

K

194

THE NOVICE OF

“ habit, which my lady made him lay aside Cf when he exchanged his minstrelsy for a “ clerkship.”

, “ And to whom do they now belong ?” said Imogen eagerly.

“ His dress has remained here unno-“ ticed, just, I believe, as he flung it “ himself the morning of the night he was tmeen a prisoner to the western “ tower.”

“Himself!” said Imogen with emotion, taking up the sleeve of the doublet.

“Yes,” said the page; “it has not “ been removed since he slept here. This “ part of the castle is seldom frequented ; “ and the domestics, who fancied themin-tc strel a magician, believe there is some u dangerous spell over the room : so it is cc never visited by any one save myself.”

“ And the harp ?” said Imogen.

“ Oh, true, mademoiselle, the harp—is “ mine.”

“ Did lie give it you, Theodore?”

“ Why, mademoiselle,” said the page

ST. DOMINICK.

105

hesitating, “ I did him a service, and he, cf in return, presented me with this in-<c strument ; the only recompence I would t( receive, or I believe he had to offer.” tf And may I ask what that service tf was ?”

c< Nay, mademoiselle, you must pardon “ me,” said the page,’changing colour; “ it is of a nature not to be mentioned. “ Would he had his harp again, and I—” The page stopped abruptly.

" Would you part with the harp r” said Imogen, with affected indifference.

“ Would you wish for it, mademoi-f<r selle ?” said the page, with a penetrating smile.

If you would suffer me to become a “ purchaser,” said Imogen blushing.

“ Perhaps,” said the young page, casting down his eyes, “ you would think me “ too exorbitant; and I should be apt to demand more than you would be willing “ to grant.”

“ Rather say, Theodore, more than I tf possess.”

196

THE NOVICE OF

“ Not so, mademoiselle; you are rich, “ Oh ! how rich you arc in all-—”

“ Your terms?” said Imogen with im-patence.

One kiss of that fair hand/*

A kiss of the hand!” said Imogen with a smile, and blushing. ‘f Nay, Theo-<{ dore, I must not take advantage of your “ gallantry.” Then holding out her little purse, which contained some valuable coins presented to her by the minor canoness, she added, “ Will you for the present ac-cept of this, till— ?”

“ Holy Mother!” interrupted the page; “ not for the world ! Sell the harp ! and to you ! not for the world! Ah ! ma-“ demoiselle, how little do you know— !” Then pausing abruptly, he added, after a moment’s confusion and silence, Shall I convey it to your apartment?”

“ Not,” said Imogen, “ until you suffer ie me to fasten this round your neck,** drawing from her own a silver reliquary. The young page, colouring with pleasure.

ST. DOMINICK.

197

kneeled to receive it. It was given me 14 by the lady abbess,” said Imogen, while she fastened it round his neck, when I îf left the convent, as a charm against every danger; and since,” she added with an arch smile, you seem so obsti-<c nately to adhere to your first terms, “ why I believe I must give you the kiss of the hand into the bargain.” The page suddenly dropt the reliquary, which he was on the point of raising to his lip, and substituted the extended hand of Imogen,

Ah !” said the delighted boy, <f I feel “ the charm your precious gift contains is " not proof against every danger!’*

At night she flew to her little apartment, as if the sweet inducement of a friend’s welcome awaited her. Theodore, as he had promised, had left the harp there ; and Imogen pressed its chords, not only with her fingers, but her lips, while a refined regret insinuated itself into her mind that the page had touched those

198

THE NOVICE OF

•strings she would wish to believe had last confessed the minstrel’s magic touch.

Some little skill on the lute, communicated by the sister Pasiphac, and a knowledge of the science of music almost intuitive, assisted her in the progress on an instrument, whose soft and plaintive tones were well adapted to the rich and various melody of her fine voice. Music soon became her only amusement, and the remoteness of her apartment favored its pursuit unknown to lady Magdelaine. Music raised in her soul that delirium of extacy she was so organized to feel ; and in repeating those passages which had most charmed her in the minstrel’s performance, the memory of past joys awakened to the sound. The associating principle that existed between the feelings and the sense exerted its influence, and the harmony that charmed the ear gave a thrill of rapture to the heart.

The third month which followed the minstrel’s departure dissolved the last fond

ST. DOMINICK.

199

waking dream which had hitherto flattered* the hopes of Imogen ; and the belief that she had been deceived equally by her own credulity and the minstrel's professions, took possession of a mind too proud, too delicate, not to agonize to the conviction. The flush of her lively sensations gradually subsided, and every degree of their progressive extinction was marked by a regret that she had been deluded into a sense of bliss that almost expired in its birth, and left behind it many a sweet and poignant recollection, to add a deeper shade of contrast on the sullen doom that awaited her. To that keen vivacity of emotion which lately agitated her bosom, succeeded the pensive settled gloom which so frequent!}' takes possession of the delicate and refined mind in its transition from suspense animated hjr hope to hopeless certaint\r. Yet not alone the disappointment of a first-awakened passion produced the despondency which seized her heart, and clouded the frolic

200

THE NOVICE OF

spirit of her native disposition. Hitherto the impossibility of their attainment stifled in her bosom those vague and scarcely-understood ideas which pointed to society and the world. The narrow limit^of that sphere she had moved in, the chill austerity of her associates, by suppressing even a hope of emancipation, reduced her to a tranquil acquiescence to a destiny equally uncongenial to her reason and her sentiments. But her intercourse with the minstrel had not only awakened a new sense of happiness in her breast; it called forth those talents which, reflected back in his praise, shone with a splendor too dazzling for the gloom of privacy and sequestration; it had roused the dormant ambition of her soul to reach that point of elevation she had been from her cradle anxious to obtain, and it confirmed those long-nourished and increasing suggestions of reason, that the profession for which she was destined was equally inimical to religion and morality, to the intentions of

ST. DOMINICK.

201

Providence, and the welfare of society, and which would for ever annihilate her happiness, without repaying- the sacrifice by those illusions which satisfy the mind of ignorance, credulity, and superstition, for all the solid and beneficial realities it has forfeited. Add to all this, the spirit of romance ruled the mind of Imogen with no trivial influence. She lived in an age when the fantastic goddess shed her illusions over the world, and established a sovereign empire, which required the united efforts of genius and reason to undermine. The warm and lively imagination of the young novice was well adapted to receive the bright enthusiast’s” inspirations, and to pursue her rapid flights and wildest fancies beyond the sober boundaries of probability, beyond the guardian wing of safety.

An elopement from the chateau had therefore long been the object of her meditation, ere her return to the convent of St. Dominick prohibited every hope of

k 2



202

THE NOVICE OP

escape. *f Reason, happiness, even virtue itself,” said Imogen, ff sanctions the in-rf tention, though a desperate one;” while Love, in league with Fancy, lay laughing perdu in a corner of her heart at the sober names given to his suggestions.

But in her plan of escape Imogen had neither end nor object: but then she had delightful adventures, novel situations, and interesting circumstances in abundance. Love too sketched out (by fond association) the character she should assume to effect her purpose; it was that of a young wandering musician. What a sweet, sweet cf character !” said Imogen, with a sigh and a smile ; and chance furnished her with a disguise, for the minstrel's habit still lay in the unfrequented chamber, and, like precious relics, daily received a visit from a votarist of no lukewarm devotion.

My motive,” said Imogen, is war-“ rantable in the eye of heaven and of na-ture. I will not violate the altar of the fc Deity by vows my heart disowns, my

ST. DOMINICK.

203

tc reason condemns. That heart tells me <€ it can never renounce the ties, the af-fections of humanity ; that reason dis-approves it ever should ; and until I can “ believe a life useless to my fellow-erea-“ tures can be pleasing in the eye of my “ God, I will never embrace it: there re-ff mains therefore no other alternative but to fly from the fate that awaits me.” Unprotected, innocent, unfriended orphan ! whither wouldst thou fly? what asylum opens to receive thee ? what fond arms unfold to embrace thee? where wilt thou find a tender bosom on which to repose thy aching temples? where wilt thou find an affectionate heart to sooth the sufferings thine own has encountered ? The world is indeed “ all before thee where to “ choose,” but who will confirm that choice? who will realise the fairy visions of thy sanguine expectations ?

It was thus Experience should have addressed the novice ; but the novice was but just eighteen ; the fire of imagination, the

204

THE NOVICE OF

illusions of fancy, the spirit of genius, all bewildered her senses, animated her mind, and, midst their seducing admonitions, the “ still small voice” of Experience was unheard. O youth! thou season of delight, sweet æra of premature immortality! what is there in the sober satisfaction, the cautious comforts, and solid certainties of age, to compensate for the loss of thy golden dreams ! dreams which memory cherishes with enthusiasm, and after-life glances back on with a faint thrill of that rapture ye once bestowed. Hope ! genius ! virtue ! ’tis in the genial bosom of youth your fairest loveliest blossoms blow and flourish !

ST. DOM I-NICK.

205

CHAP- IX.

Friendship makes the lights of its objects equally matters of regard with it* own ; and marks a mind that is innocent, candid, liberal, and susceptible of the virtues which insure the happiness of human nature.

Bruce’s Elements of the Science of Ethics.

These are thinking heretics ;

I should forgive them, did some upstart sect

With sharper rigours charm this headlong zeal ;

But they in sooth must reason.

Walpole.

HOWEVER romantically venturous the mind of Imogen, it required some desperate circumstance to animate her to the execution of those visionary plans her fancy had so often sketched, and reason still refused to ratify.

Contemptuous silence, or bigoted exhortation on the part of the friar ; sharp reproof, or oblique sarcasm on that of the lady rJagdelaine; with wearisome conversations on the party and religious jargon

206

THE NOVICE OF

of the day ; the mystery of a vision, or the miracle of a saint; the claims of the duke de Mayenne, or the heresy of the king; included the whole system of social intercourse at the chateau de Montmorell; and furnished daily aggravation to confirm the young novice in the only scheme by which she could escape the apathy of her present life, or the gloomy destiny that awaited her future. But a circumstance now occurred to steady those wavering resolutions which had long vibrated between the ardour of her wishes and the strength of her apprehensions. The Crusades were finished ; nothing prevented lady Magde-laine’s visiting Paris, but the unsettled state of the times, in order to send her work to the press; and the day of Imogen's return to the convent of St. Dominick was already fixed on. The lady Magdelaine, as a proof of her munificence and piety, was to pay down a large sum on the admission of her amanuensis among the sisterhood ; and on the day of her profession.

ST. DOMINICK.

207

to present the convent with a rich set of altar plate. Thus the lady Mag-delaine, by a stroke of sanctimonious policy, in rewarding- the arduous services of her secretary, remitted a douceur to heaven, in part payment for the price of her own salvation !

There was nothing- talked of at the convent but the pious zeal and holy munificence of the lady de Montmorell; and the young novice was supposed to enter the sacred pale under the most favourable auspices. The young novice, however, was of a different opinion : with a spirit of independence that electrified the narrow minds of her patroness and the friar, she absolutely refused the offered donation of lady Magdelaine on her own account.

<f If, madam,ff said she one day, as the lady Magdelaine and the father director were enumerating the benefits she would derive from entering the convent on such respectable terms, and furnishing many arguments to stimulate her gratitude :	if.

THE NOVICE OF

madam, it is for my sake you are thus generous, oh, for my sake, direct your Cf generosity in a better channel. The or-“ der of St. Dominick is the most opulent “ in France, and the serfs on the skirts of the forest de Montmorell the most wretched ; oppressed by famine, by all <e the horrors of civil war, they languish in <f misery and want, while safety and abun-“ dance reign in the convent of Saint Dominick. Let then, madam, those wretches, who look up to you for assist-<f ance, feel that bounty it were the mock-<f ery of religion to bestow on those who, <e professing poverty, revel in opulence.

Save me from a life for which I feel no ff vocation, for which I am unworthy ; “ and suuer me to continue the most faith-ful of your servants, the most grateful of your friends.”

“ I understand you,” said the lady Mag-delaine with a sarcastic sneer : ff suffer you to accompany me to Paris, and prove your pious fortitude, by exposing

ST. DOM fNICK.

200

ft you to trials of temptation. No,” continued the lady Magdelaine, f‘ if by my “ precepts or example I cannot lure a wandering soul to heaven, St. Dominick tf forbid I should assist in drawing; a soul “ from it.”

“ ]\Iother of God, avert that crime!0 said the friar, crossing himself ; “ and thou, <c oh perverse of spirit, it now becomes us, “ who took thee from the church’s guar-“ dian wing, in sacred trust, to give thee i( back os wc received thee. Thou vvert “ then a very saint forsooth, nor could “ thy piety be coped withal ; miracles rf were expected to be performed at thy “ shrine, and thy name to be enrolled in “ the album sanctorum of perfection ! but <c now ! oh, sad frailty of poor human na-cc ture ! thou art little better than one of <c the wicked. But thou art young, and ft hast time for amendment; thou hast the <f examples of thirty kings and queens, “ who resigned the crown and sceptre for “ the veil and crozier $ and, once wedded

THE NOVICE OF

<c to a heavenly spouse, dedicated to the embraces of a superior being, thy gro-cf veling soul shall rise above all human “ passions : and after a life of piety, self-denial, and mortification, thou wilt have ff a chance of dying in a religious rapture, or haply of being added to the list of holy saints !”

“ The list of martyrdom you mean, fa-<r thcr,” said Imogen, with a Hash of her wonted playful spirits.

Cf Martyrdom to thy sinful propensities,” said the lady Magdelaine, who, in conjunction with the father, continued an exordium of more than an hour long on the wickedness of all human affections, worldly attachments, and mortal passions; substituting invective for argument, and severity for admonition; till Imogen, wearied beyond all power of farther endurance, burst into tears, and exclaimed, “ Spare, spare “ me now, madam, and do with me as <f you please.” The lady Magdelaine, who trembled lest the loss of a soul should

ST. DOMINICK.

211

be laid to her account, and who was enraged at the spirited opposition of Imogen, now willingly believed her eloquence had etFccted a reformation, and that the tears of the novice flowed

“ From a heart contrite, in sign Of sorrow unfeign’d and humiliation meek.”

Milton.

And a few incorrect chapters being yet to transcribe, the lady Magdelaine informed her she was not to return to the convent till that day week ; and dismissed her with a gentleness to which she was little accustomed.

The convent of St. Dominick lay somethingless than half a league from the chateau; the path which led to it was wild and romantic; it was in her leisure hours a favourite walk with Imogen, and her visits to Saint Dominick were almost as frequent as her walks ; for the only friend her heart had ever acknowledged, the minor canoness, was fast verging on eternity;

THE NOVICE OV

and the friendship, the tenderness, the compassion of the novice, led her inces-santly to the couch of the dying-nun.

Lady. Mag-delaine encouraged these visits, and the abbess and the nuns received her with a cordiality that induced her to repeat them ; while the minor canoness seemed to receive pleasure only through the medium of her cheering society : yet in all these visits, when confidence was most boundless, when the sanguine and ingenuous character of the novice lay bare and exposed to the penetrating eye of the canoness, and when their sentiments and opinions were discussed with mutual freedom ; still, in the most concealed sanctuary of her bosom, reposed the secret of Imogen s heart. The adventures of the minstrel had reached the anxious enquiries of the curicus nuns, and the minor canoness, who was ever prompt to ridicule and condemn the tittle-tattle propensities of the sisterhood, looked on it as one of their tales of wonder nor even put Imogen's

ST. DOMINICK.	213

traitorous feelings to the test by an enquiry on the subject,

Imogen, who trembled lest the tenderness of her heart was but its weakness, and who dreaded the sarcastic raillery, as much as she venerated the virtue and admired the brilliant talents of the canoness, hugged herself on her fortunate reserve,, and felt proportionable courage to reveal to her, her long cherished intention of avoiding a religious life by flight; since she could not be supposed to be influenced in her dangerous attempt by the weakness of passion rather than by the conviction of reason,

Three weeks had elapsed since a close attendance in the study of lady Magdelaine had allowed her to visit the convent : on the evening of the day the above conversa'» tion took place, she obtained permission to visit the sister Pasiphiie, and remain with her that night.

Accompanied by one of lady Magda-laine’s women, she set out on her Jittîepe-

214

THE NOVICE OF

destrian journey ; and during its perform* ance determined on acquainting the ca-noness with her resolution, to profit by her advice, and be decided by her opinion ; while she thought she knew enough of the

o	o

nun to believe she would applaud her determination, and probably assist her to realize it.

When she reached the convent, she found the nuns at vespers, all but the sister Pasiphae, who was now wholly confined to her cell; and when Imogen entered it she beheld her reclined on her couch, and apparently wrapped in a soft repose. Imogen crept towards her, and started with emotion as she observed the visible change which had taken place in her friend since she had last beheld her : her form seemed almost transparent, and to the gaze of the novice appeared little more than a beautiful anatomy ; from her closed eye stole a tear, which glittered on a cheek white and polished as Parian marble ; on her pale lip played a smile which, like that tear, seemed

ST. DOMINICK.

215

the extatic offspring of her dream s bright vision. The sun, as it set opposite to the narrow casement of her cell, flushed a rosy tint on her snowy drapery, and tinged lier whole form with something more than human. One skeleton hand was spread on her bosom, the other rested on her lute, which lay against the couch : suddenly her seraph smile disappeared, her tear dried on her burning cheek, her countenance became convulsed, her frame shook almost to dissolution ; she panted, struggled, and, with a shriek that seemed to burst her heart, threw herself out of the bed. The arms of the trembling and scarcely less agitated Imogen received her, on whose face she fixed a wild and eager gaze ; then sighing, she, with a look of affectionate recognition, pressed her hand and faintly exclaimed, tf Oh, how welcome is the sight of thee! thy eye alone beams peace and “ youthful joy; thy presence, only, cheers my drooping spirit!”

Imogen, weeping, raised her on her

Si 6

THE NOVICE OF

couch, and, kneeling beside her, pressed her hand with her lips.

" How warm/’ said the nun, ff is the fC pressure of thy lips, and how soothingly (f grateful thy tears ! may they never flow ff but for the sorrows of another !” then shuddering, and with a look of wildness, she added, oh, it was such a dream ! so f< swTeet, and yet so dreadful !”

Methought indeed it was,” said Imogen ; for while I watched thee as thou (f slept, thy countenance exhibited such ff strong emotion/’

<f And oh, well it might,” said the nun emphatically, for that dream contained <fthe epitome of my life. Imogen, I fan-" çied myself in that sweet era of exist-<r ençe, when love and hope and every joy <( ran high ; when pleasure twined her <( rosy wreaths round my polished brow,

(( and guileless rapture thrilled on every <ç sense. Seated amidst the embowering fC shades of my sweet paternal home, I [[ beheld at my feet the object of my

ST. DOMINICK.

217

“ heart’s idolatry ; 1 felt the pressure of “ his lip on my trembling hand, and my ct ears drank the welcome sound, that in “ one short week death only could divide “ us. Suddenly the scene was changed, “ and instead of the groves of Provence, I r€ found myself in the great court of the “ Louvre in Paris; all was darkness and “desolation! save when the lightning’s “ flash gave to my eye the mangled forms “ of dying men, or bands of murderers, “ plunging their reeking daggers into the tf bosoms of unresisting victims. Prostrate “ to the earth, I invoked the protection of “ St. Bartholomew, whose festival it was : “ methought I beheld him on every side “ succouring the oppressed and rescuing “ the wounded ; but when his eye beamed “ full on me, it was my love ; I sprang “ forward and found safety in his arms; “ I felt the soft pressure of his embrace, “ I felt his tender sigh on my cheek and " his warm tears on my lip. At that mo-“ ment a ghastly band rushed forward, they

VOL. I.	L

218

THE NOVICE OF

“ plunged their daggers in the bosom of my tc love ; they dragged me from that bleed-“ ing bosom,, and threw me headlong into a “ dreary vault, where reposed the moulder-“ ing bones of St. Dominick ; then, as the “ monument closed o’er my head, me-<c thought f did perceive those murderers “ were my brothers !”

“ God of heaven!” said Imogen, shuddering, “and is this the epitome of thy <e lifer” The nun folded her hands on her bosom, cast up lier eyes to heaven, and gently waved her head, while the tears fell in large drops down her pale face.

At that moment a group of the nuns entered the cell ; although they came to make enquires for the health of the sister Pasiph'âe, they all circled round Imogen as soon as they perceived her, and, in spite of the weakness of the poor invalid, were clamorous in those numerous and simple questions their insatiate curiosity, and eternal sameness of life, rendered interesting. Imogen having satisfied them as far as lay

ST. DOMINICK.

219

in lier power, they turned the conversation to all that had occurred at vespers; talked of father Philips havingmade a most risible mistake, of the awkwardness of the officiating nun, and the old sister Urselin’s having fallen asleep in the middle of a jubilate, and awakening chaunted the service of the dead ; then having exhausted all their flippant nothings, they wished the wearied canoness a good night, and took Imogen with them to pay her respect to the abbess.

As soon as the novice got liberated from the tedious homilies and drowsy exordiums of the holy mother, she flew back to the canoness: she found her something more composed, and seated at a small table on which her lamp burnt, while one of the lay sisterhood arranged her bed. She received Imogen with a melancholy smile, and welcomed her return. “ I have ob-tained permission/’ said the novice, “ to “ take possession of sister Mary’s mattress, “ by your bedside, if she have no objec-

THE NOVICE OF

“ tion.” “ None in the world/’ said the sister significantly, happy to be dismissed from her nightly attendance, which the weakness of the invalid required.

When they were alone, Imogen entered on the subject which had brought her to the convent : she unfolded to the canoness the gradual progress of her ideas ; she compared her present sense of religion with that in which she had been brought up; she candidly confessed her horror of convent life, and her resolution to avoid it: '•'yet/’ added Imogen, as you alone opposed the fanaticism of my infant prejudices, as you alone shed a beam upon my mind, which has never since been fC obscured, but spread its light with in-creasing brightness, to you only do I ff confide the sentiments of that mind, and “ the resolution they have inspired.”

The canoness listened to her in extreme emotion, and fixing her large black eyes on her face said, with a flash of her wonted animation : “ So, my young saint ! you

ST. ROMINICK.

221

“ have at last discovered there are some “ spota in our feasts of charity ?” Then assuming a tone grave and impressive, she affectionately took Imogen’s hand and continued : “ My dear child, there are certain " principles which the very constitution “ of our natures lead us to receive ; im-“ mutable truths, which come home with resistless force to every bosom ; and ff though obscured by those prejudices “ born amidst the profound ignorance of " early ages, confirmed by time, and that “ passive indolence by which men take up “ their opinions upon trust, and avoid the trouble of thinking for themselves, yet “ the human mind, in its progressive state, “ is still propelled towards perfection, and gradually shakes off its errors. In the words of an Italian poet:

* Come d’autunno le foglie

L’uno appresso delle altra infin che’l tamo

Prinde alia terra tutte le sue spoglie.’*

* Dante, Inferno.

222

THE NOVICE OF

ff All therefore that you have now related £*' to me of the change which has taken place in your sentiments, pleases with-out amazing me ; since it confirms what “ 1 have always believed, that reason, when suffered to take it course, will ever c>' confirm the universal principles of truth and nature, and distinguish, amidst the te various documents of human education, the good from the bad ; adhering with “ firmness to the former, and rejecting the et latter with humility.”

£f When in thy infant years I beheld “ thee, and all thy blooming virtues, sacri-tl ficed at the sanguinary altar of fanati-“ cism, I pitied thee; when in the clois-“ ters of Saint Dominick I beheld the cr proud ambition of genius soaring beyond " the narrow limits of destiny, I admired thee; and now, that I find thy reason rc asserting its rights, thy nature recoiling “ from the barbarous distinctions created u by perverted religion, not by {he spirit (( of true holiness, from the horrors of fa-

ST. DOMINICK.

223

rf naticism, from the errors of superstition, “ I revere thee-“ But here my commendations end; for “ here the wonderons strength of thy <f mind ceases to operate, and the sugges-“ tions of a wild romantic imagination guide thy efforts : elope ! whither, where, “ to whom, by what means, and for what “ end ? ,J

“ Alas/' said Imogen sighing, “that I never thought of : but cf this I am cer-“ tain, a fate more dreadful than now t€ awaits me I cannot encounter. ”

<e Thou sayest true/’ said the nun emphatically ; my heart can best aver how fatally true ! But is there, my sweet “ imprudent, no medium between certain ct and probable destruction ? is there no friend to save thee from immolation ?

“ On earth,*’ said Imogen, embracing the eanoness’s knees, ff I own no friend but thee. ”

The nun, bending forward, folded her arms around her, and let fall a tear on her

224

THE NOVICE OF

cheek. " That tear, ” said Imogen, as it mingled with her own, “ is my assurance ff thou wilt assist me to escape the doom “ that awaits me ; wilt thou not ? *'

And is it to me, ” said the nun, raising and embracing her, “ to me thou dost apply for relief; to me who have sworn “on the altar of my God to violate every “ law, human and divine, he has implanted “ in my breast, to obliterate the affec-“ tions he has braced on my soul, and to “ render others as wretched, were that “ possible, as myself ? knowest thou not “ that I am bound to destroy, to abhor, “ all who dare think differently from the “ way I have been taught myself to think, and that I should deliver thee over to “ inquisitorial horrors, rather than by com-“ misera ling thy fate sanction thy apos-“ tacy ? M

“ Alas, ” said Imogen trembling, as the lamp’s blue flame flashed in the wild and convulsed countenance of the nun, “ alas., “if you desert me, then am I wretched “ indeed ! ”

ST. DOMINICK.

225

“ Desort thee ! ” said the nun recovering, and with an air of tenderness, fc de-u sert thee, thou sweet victim, never! yet e< the world deserted me when at thy age : “ with all thy warm and social affections^ “ I was entombed within this convent ; “ here withered the bloom of my heart’s tl first love, here died my hopes, never to <f live again !” Then, taking a medallion from her bosom, and touching aspring, it flew open, and presented to the eye of Imogen two beautiful portraits :Behold/’ continued the nun, “ this fair representa-“ tive of youth and vivacity ; such once " was Pasiphae, and this beautiful and

manly countenance was------” The nun

paused, and for a moment concealed her face in her veil : then with less emotion continued ; “ The chevalier de Sorville and " Rosalie de Vilette, after an attachment of some years, founded on a sympathy ‘f of talent and pursuit, received the sanc-“ tion of their friends to their union. The “ brothers of Rosalie, high in favour with l 2

226

THE NOVICE OF

“ Charles IX, were implicated in the hor-rors of St. Bartholomew, and became ct the avenging ministers of their diaboli-cal monarch : at the moment that De ff Sorville, like the Spirit of Mercy, flew from side to side, protecting, rescuing, Cf and consoling the persecuted Hugonots, in snatching a victim from the uplifted “ arm of the fanatic De Vilette, De Sorville received a wound in his own bosom, re-" ceived it, O God ! in the sight of Ro-salie. That moment gave birth to mad-ness; and when, after a long, long ob-livion to her woes, the wretched Rosalie recovered her reason, she found herself tranformed into the sister Pasiphae of Saint Dominick !—but I pain thy kind “ heart.”

“ Nay, in sweet pity, continue,” said the weeping novice.

“ Alas ! I have only to add, that my “ brother’s death speedily followed my re-“ covery, and that De Sorville still lives, but oh ! lives not for me !” The nun

ST. DOMINICK.

227

then, after a long pause, added : “ And “ thinkest thou I will not make an effort c{ to save thee from that fate that impends es o'er thee? Indeed I will. After an “ absence of twenty years from the world, “ it contains but one being whom I can “ call friend. You once saw her at the “ parlour grate, when she came from Paris “ to visit me, at a time when. I was on the “ point of dissolution.”

“ I do remember well,” said Imogen,. “ the lady de Rosemont, to whom, at your “ desire,, I carried a rich casket, and who “ rewarded my trouble by such grateful “ commendation as pleased my childish “ vanity !”

“The same; the amiable sister of the “ lover of Rosalie de Vilette. To her I u will commend thee ; and she, for my kt sake, and when I shall be no more, will “ protect thee. But hark ! the bell tolls “ twelve; retire thee now to rest, and by “ to-morrow I shall have fixed on some “ plan for thee to pursue.”

228

THE NOVICE OF

Imogen, >vho wept tears of joy, loaded the canoness with her affectionate and grateful caresses, embraced her knees,, and kissed her hands a thousand times, while she earnestly entreated to he allowed to sit up with her till she should herself be inclined to retàre to rest; but the canoness said she had some papers to arrange, and that it was never her custom to go to rest till some hours after midnight. Imogen, fearing to be intrusive, threw herself on the mattress ; and, wearied by her long walk and her various emotions, soon fell into a soft and sweet repose.

The dawn was just glancing through the casement, and the bell tolling for matins, when Imogen from dreams of ideal bliss awakened, and beheld the canoness still seated at the table ; her arm supported her head, and her lamp burning dimly before her. The novice arose, and tenderly hinted her suggestions that she had not taken any repose ; when, looking beneath the black veil that shaded her face, she

ST. DOMINICK.

229

was shocked to behold the visible change which had taken place in it since the preceding night. The hollow eyes of the nun were inflamed and red with weeping. The snowy whiteness ot her complexion was changed to a deadly sallow, and her voice was hollow and inarticulate. After swallowing a draught prescribed by the physician of the convent, she appeared more composed read over with great earnestness a letter that lay on the table,, then folded and directed it to the Chevalier de Sorville. As she wrote the name, Imogen, who looked over her shoulder, saw the tears efface the letters almost as fast as they were written. The canoness then took up another letter, and presented it to Imogen to read : it was addressed to Madame de Rosemont, and almost wholly related to Imogen, who wras mentioned in a manner that called a blush into her cheek as she perused the commendations of one whose esteem she so dearly prized ; but the concluding lines paled that blush.

230

THE NOVICE OF

and the tears of mourning* friendship sue-ceeded to the glow of self-satisfaction as she read the following passage:—

Friend of my life, farewell ! That “ life which your friendship alone ren-ce dered worthy of supporting, hastens " with rapid flight to its last sad hour !— Cf My existence for these two last years " has been a miracle to all, to myself a “ burthen. A protracted being has been (t the expiation of my sins ; and death,. “ like a welcome long-expected friend, ff lures me to those joys life denied me.. rt When you will receive this, I shall pro-f< bably be no more. The dim eye, whose weak and imperfect vision scarce views at these characters I trace ; the trembling and skeleton hand that with difficulty guides my pen ; and those confused and “ incoherent thoughts that rather con-found than dictate the heart’s still-glow-“ ing wishes—all sadly coincide with those internal principles of decay which “ have long been stealing me to the grave.

ST. DOMINICK.

231

“ The young novice will give thee a small " packet, to be delivered to thy brother : “ it contains his picture, and the letter he addressed some fifteen years ago to the (C minor canoness of St. Dominick; it “ contains also a few lines, not from the " fond Rosaliç de Yilette, but the dying “ Pasiphae. Yet, if over these few lines “ some faint beam of love’s decaying fire " sheds its lingering glow, and the wo-" man’s treacherous heart betrays its <( weakness even in the hour of awful dis-11 solution, oh! let them not meet his eye, " lest he, who towers above mortality, “ perceive how distant he has left me in “ virtue’s steep ascent! Yet I hadamind ef that would have gone goal for goal with " his, but that my heart lacked strength : <e but now all is over, and death will soon " accomplish what reason and philosophy “ could not ; for De Sorville will cease to “ be beloved when Rosalie shall cease to " live. Once more, farewell for ever !” "For ever!” faintly articulated Imo-

232

THE NOVICE OF

gen, concealing her face in her veil ; then throwing her arms round the nun, sobbed aloud upon her bosom.

“ My dear child,” said the canoness, in great emotion, but too weak to weep, “ this is too much ! Spare me, spare thy-(t self, nor let us by vain regrets occupy “ the precious time which should be de-€< voted to saving thee from that fate “ which at thy age consigned me to mi-fc sery! And trust me, sweet maid, that, “ after a long, long exclusion from the “ happiness of serving a fellow-creature, et the idea of snatching you from—oh! “ wretchedness supreme !—a living death, “ will shed a cheering ray upon my life’s tr sad close, and, like a smiling cherub, “ hover round my heart till its last vital “ pulse shall cease to play, then mingle

with the joys of opening heaven !

“ Nay, hear me out, while I have “ strength to speak. The mode of thy il escape alone perplexes me with obsta-“ cles. To-day I shall see a person on

ST. DOMINICK.

233

f< whom I think I may confide,, and whose services I have a right to claim. Mean-time return thou to the chateau de Mont-morell, and obtain permission to come “ to-morrow evening to the convent at <f the hour of vespers. . I know thou hast long been the instrument of our supe-“ lior’s sanctimonious avarice, who thinks te by thy means to secure some rich dona-cf tions to the convent from thy patroness, “ therefore is she impatient for thy re-“ turn ; and the lady Magdelaine, who has long trembled for her own salvation through thy apostacy, will be as anxious <f to entomb thee here as the abbess.— “ You must escape their vigilance, and et not depend on their generosity for your f< emancipation : for these women, who 'f possess zeal without truth, and faith “ without virtue, will make it a merit in *f the eye of heaven to force thee into that mode of thinking which, professing themselves from prejudice and fear, <f not conviction, empowers them to shut

TIIT. NOVICE- OF

se or open the gates of heaven as their “ own bigoted wills decree. Oh I they “ know not,, they feel not, that the bond of true religion, like heaven’s own good-“ ness, should be unlimitable, and enclose “ within its circle all mankind. Religion “ is to them a little code of local ceremo-f< nies, drawn up by human invention of the lowest order, of useless mysteries “ and childish bugbears, set to puzzle, tc not to convince—made to terrify, not to instruct. But thou, with whom reli-“ gion is but a better name for happiness “ and virtue, mayest thou escape that bondage with which the zeal of false “ devotion would fetter all thy blooming virtues ! Yet think not that thou wilt leave all bigotry behind thee when thou et fliest from a convent: Oh no ! it is a hardy plant, and thrives in every soil, €t save in that where true religion only “ flourishes. ’Tis not beneath the cowl ft and scapular alone self-wrapt illiberal ie prejudice veils its deformity : it finds

ST. DOMINICK.

235

“ protection in every sect ; for each ber-<f lieves itself alone the true, seizes with sacrilegious hand the apostolic key of “ paradise, and flings beyond salvation all “ who can’t believe the dogmas it holds « out.” .

The nun then, after a moment’s pause, continued: “ Lest my fading recollection i( should totally desert me, I will make “ what little arrangement I can at the “ present moment.” Then, taking out her own picture from the case Imogen had seen the night before, she placed it in the note directed to the Chevalier De Sorville, and fixed her eyes on his portrait for a considerable time, till her hand trembled so she could scarcely hold it. In a hurried manner she attempted to close the case, but finding the effort too much, she exclaimed, t( It will not be!” and put it into Imogen’s hands, who fastened it.— ff Conceal it carefully,” said* the nun, turning away her head, u and give it <c with that letter to the lady de Rose-“ mont.”

236

THE NOVICE OF

Imogen put them both in her bosom. “ This ring,” said the nun, after a long pause, in which she seemed to struggle for composure, taking a rich diamond from a casket, tf was given me by a dying mo* <f ther.” Then kissing it, and bathing it with her tears, she placed it on Imogen’s finger. <f Wear it/’ said she, tf for the sake of her unfortunate daughter: and et here is a small purse of gold ; thou “ wilt need it, my poor little wanderer, t( nor wilt thou refuse it from one whose ee wish to serve thee is indeed great, but “ that her will lacks means.” Imogen looked at the ring, then at the purse, then in the face of the canoness ; and, falling at her feet, folded her bands in her’s, pressed them to her lips, and dewed them with her tears, in all that vivacity of motion and gesture the child of nature only possesses. <f An honest heart has no feel-C( ing so strong as gratitude, and a liberal <f one none so strong as the delicacy with ff which it receives it.” What a beautiful

ST. DOMINICK.

23?

illustration of this just and elegant maxim was the canoness and the novice at that moment ! The countenance of Imogen, as her face was raised towards the nun, beamed with all the energy of her grateful feelings ; in the tender but half-averted glance of Pasiphae was registered the meek delicacy with which it was received, not refusing, yet denying a claim to it.

“ I have done nothing,” said the canoness, raising the novice,but what you “ can repay a thousand fold by conduct-iC ing yourself with prudence, and by re-ff straining that romantic turn of mind “ which is so great an enemy to the cir-“ cumspection you should observe/’— The canoness then requested her to return to the chateau, lest their conference should awaken suspicion ; and Imogen had only time to embrace her, when some of the nuns entered ; and after (in the usual common-place terms of regret) expressing their surprise at the alteration so visible in the appearance of the sister

238

T1IG NOVICE OF

Pasiphiie, they took Imogen with them to assist at matins, who immediately after the service returned home.

CHAP. X.

I am fresh of spirit, and resolved To meet all peril very constantly.

Shakspeare.

THE day which intervened between that on which she had parted from the canoness and that on which they were finally to determine on the mode of her escape, was passed by Imogen in all that restless agitation of a mind laboring under the ever-torturing feelings of suspense ; a species of suffering of all others the least supportable to such a mind as Imogen’s, which, sanguine and impatient, scarcely conceived a project that fancy did not overleap probability to realise.

The lady Magdelaine, who possessed nothing of genius but its variability, was

ST. DOMINICK.

239

constantly altering, or, as she termed it, improving, son>e passage of lier work, which caprice rather than judgment disapproved ; and Imogen was detained to a later hour than usual on the evening when for the last time she was to visit the convent of St. Dominick, and by that visit save herself from becoming its inhabitant for life.

Full of all those fears natural to her situation, she dared not ask permission to attend the convent vespers, lest suspicion should awaken at the request ; for the sun had set some time before she had left the study of lady Magdelaine.

While in doubtful anxiety she stood at the casement of her apartment, and casta longing look towards the convent’s spires, Theodore, the young page, led out a mule from the postern gate beneath. “ Theo-te dore,” said Imogen softly, whither “ goest thou ?” The page started, turned round, and replied, “ To our bishop’s y castle, mademoiselle, with this packet

240

THE NOVICE OF

“ from father Anselm, which is to be deli-vered before the morning’s dawn.”

“ And if thy path lies near the convent “ of St. Dominick, wilt thou give me thy protection to its gates ?”

" Will I ? Oh ! though it did not, how “ gladly would I go out of my way for the " happiness of attending you !”

“ Tarry then a moment,” said Imogen, wrapping a large cloak round her, and creeping down softly to the postern gate, where Theodore received her. The summit of the loftiest mountain scarcely blushed to the departing radiance of the sun ; over the spires of the convent the evening planet flung its steady light, while to the upturned gaze of Imogen and her young companion, on the deep blue of the atmosphere, countless suns, surrounded by their attendant worlds, gradually appeared.

What a heavenly night!” said the page, throwing the bridle over the mule's neck, who followed him as he walked by Imogen’s side.

ST. DOuMIMCJk.

241

“ Heavenly indeed!” said Imogen ; and they continued to walk on in silence.

se When we consider,” said Imogen, after a pause, “ that each of those beauti-“ ful lights, which now appear and disap-“ pear to the eye, is a sun, and the centre “ of a system of worlds, we become lost, “ overwhelmed by the idea of His omni-“ potence who created them, and wonder te with the royal Psalmist, f Lord, what is “ man, or the son of man, that thou so “ regardest him !’ ”

“ When you speak to me,” said the page, “ of the wonderous works of nature, “ you appear to me yourself at once the “most beautiful, the most interesting! “ O mademoiselle, when hear you “ speak thus, and when I look at you, so “ young, so fair!”—

“Is that the convent bell?” interrupted Imogen, confused, and for the fir&t time sensible of the impropriety she had committed in stealing from the chateau, unknown to its lady, at such an hour, and

VOL. I.

M

242

THE NOVICE OF

with such a guide. “ The urgency of the “ circumstance only can excuse it,” said Imogen, determined to proceed in silence.

“ There certainly is some charm in the “ instruction you convey,” continued the page; *' for while the little astronomy and et mathematics the father Philip had the cc goodness to teach me is all forgotten as te fast as learnt, not a word, not a sentence, “ you ever uttered, but I could repeat better than my prayers ; and I have often thought, mademoiselle, that if all “ teachers were like you, the world would benefit by it more than byallthecol-“ leges of Jesuits in the world. What a “ difference ‘between the hoarse accents “ of a toothless mumbling friar, and a voice like your’s, flowing through teeth “ so white and lips so beautiful !”

There is more gallantry than truth or justice in your remark,” said Imogen coldly; ” but I prithee let us quicken|our pace, or I shall miss vespers. ”

“ Is it true, mademoiselle, that you are

ST. DOMINICK.

243

“ indeed to enter on your profession Sun-“ day next ?”

“ It is so intended, I believe, ” said Imogen.

*• Gracious God !” exclaimed the page with a profound sigh, and continued to walk on in silence. They had now come within sight of the gates of St. Dominick» when Imogen suddenly stopt. <f Hark V said she, “how sweet that strain breathes (C on the stillness of the night V*

“ It must be the nuns chaunting the “ evening service,” said the page.

tf Surely,” said Imogen, tc this is some-“ thing more than ordinary.”

They had now reached an eminence which commanded a perfect view of the convent grounds, and Imogen and her companion paused to observe the effect produced by approaching torch.light, as it flushed a red tint on the gloomy foliage of the pines and cypress that shaded the cloistral walks, while a long range of awful arches chequered with their extended shadows the

244

THE NOTICE OF

broad mass of light the illumination within the body of the church flung from the stained sashes of the lofty spiral windows. The next moment a procession of friars appeared, walking two by two, and carrying lighted tapers ; then followed the exorcist, the cross-bearer, and the officiating priest, heading four brothers of the order of St. Dominick, bearing on their should-ders a bier covered with a pall, which, flowing back from their shoulders, fell to the ground. Supported by two of her nuns appeared the abbess of St. Dominick as chief mourner; and the whole body of the sisterhood closed up the procession, which proceeded from the convent gate along the cloisters. The friars sang the Miserere till they approached the church; when their deep tones fading into a mournful cadence, the nuns began the Requiem until they were all received within the body of the church, where their soft and sweet choral strain was lost amidst the organ’s loud and solemn swell ;

ST. DOMINICK.

245

and the whole impressive scene was again wrapt in the gloom of obscurity.

“ How awful !” said the page ; c< ’tis “ one of the pious sisterhood going to her “ last home.”

Imogen in silence and with rapidity descended the eminence; then, waving her hand, and faintly uttering her thanks to Theodore, she entered the gates of the cemetery, which lay open, and glided into the church. The solemn office for the dead was just begun, and the body, placed in the centre of the aisle, was surrounded by tapers.

Imogen, though scarcely able to move, crept behind the pillars, and, entering the choir, mingled with the nuns. Not daring to make an enquiry, and full of the prophetic fears of anxious friendship, she threw herself on her knees beside the lay sister who had attended the canoness.— “ So,” said the sister, in a whispering voice, you are come too late—it is all “ oyer with your friend.”

246	THE	NOVICE	OF

“ Merciful God !” exclaimed Imogen faintly, “then it is as I suspected!0

Yes,” said the sister ; “ you are doubt-fC less disappointed, for I suppose you ex-“ pected something by her death; but “ though I had a right to whatever she “ might have left, (for the saints are wit-“ ness to the trouble I have had with her,) “ I came off no better than yourself.— "‘With all the canoness’s wondrous sense,

which was perpetually taking others to tf pieces, every trumped-up story of dis-“ tress could impose on her.”

To this selfish and unfeeling harangue Imogen listened in tears and in silence : then, after a long pause, in a voice scarcely articulate, she demanded when the canoness died. “ In something less “ than three hours after you left her,” returned the sister. ff When I went into <c her cell after matins, I found her lying “ on the ground in a swoon; but she only “ recovered from one fainting fit to fall c‘ into another. We carried her into the

ST. DOMINICK.

247

ff chapel to receive extreme unction, and ff she died in our arms, almost without ff benefit of the clergy, Christ preserve us! for she took no notice of what was going forward—she was indeed speech-less from the time you left her.”

Here the office for the dead being finished, mass was celebrated ; and the officiating priest having Hung incense over the body, and sprinkled it with holy water, the procession proceeded to the chancel, where a grave was opened to receive all that remained of the mortality of the unfortunate Rosalie de Vilette.

As soon as the body was interred, the pious crowd retired; and Imogen, who leaned behind a pillar for support, soon found herself alone, and, seating herself by the grave of the canoness, wept the death of the only friend Providence had raised to cheer her hapless destiny! Yet were her emotions, though mournful, not ungracious: it was a melancholy indulgence of that luxury of woe so profoundly

248

THE NOVICE OF

to be felt by the heart of sensibility, so impossible to define. To the tender regret of friendship succeeded a train of considerations more immediately connected with self-interest. Imogen now found herself without a friend on earth, and her “ tender buds of hope" blasted in the very moment she believed the genial influence of friendship was about to rear them to maturity. She had not the faintest suspicion of the person to whose care she believed the canoness meant to consign her, and who was to have conducted her in safety to the lady de Rosemont ; and how, helpless and unprotected as she was, she should find a mode to escape the vigilance of lady Magdelaine before three days could elapse, or travel alone through that part of the province where civil war raged with the most boundless fury, was a question unanswerable.

The deep toll of the midnight bell first awoke her attention from the train of thought that involved it to a^sense of her

ST, DOMINICK.

249

situation. Seated by the newly-made grave of the departed nun, on a fragment of a broken tomb-stone, with no other light than what the dying lamps in the distant ailes afforded Imogen shuddered at the awful gloom that surrounded her. She arose, and took a taper that burnt before the shrine of St. Dominick, and held it up; but its faint blue flame served but to make the darkness of the church more visible. Imogen, though reared in a convent, possessed not the shadow of superstition ; but “ ebon Sight is no logician and the imagination of the novice, but too much alive to the impression of existing circumstances, opposed those arguments her mind suggested to her fears, and for a moment left her a prey to those vague horrors which ignorance and error are supposed only to cherish. But their influence was but momentary ; she smiled away lier apprehensions, and advanced towards a door which opened into the cloisters, determined to proceed (o the m 2

250

TUE NOVICE OF

dormitory., and take up her night’s lodging in the cell of the lay sister who attended the canoness, and of whom she had yet much to ask relative to her deceased friend.

She had scarcely proceeded a few steps when, stumbling over some loose flags, she slightly hurt her foot. To prevent the return of a similar accident, she took down a lamp that hung from a pillar, and holding it low, as its light flashed on the tesselated pavement, she observed it chequered by the extended shadow of what she supposed an image. Instinctively raising her eyes, she beheld a tall figure leaning on the pedestal of a monument. Imogen started, believed it still to be a statue, and raised her lamp ; the figure glided away !

Imogen clung to a pillar for support; a chill faintness seized her; she would have sunk to the earth, but that an encircling arm withheld her.

f‘ Fear not, lady,” said a voice low and

ST. DOMINICK.

251

mournful ; “ the spirit of the departed “ saint thou mournest, like thy minister-<c ing angel, guards the sacred vigils of weeping friendship, and—”

Imogen heard no more : the exaggerated fears of imagination were almost wound up to frenzy ; and, after a temporary insensibility to her situation, she found herself seated at the base of the monument where the figure had leaned, and the father Philip supporting her in his arms, while his lantern burnt by her side.

“ Merciful God! was it you, father?’* said she ; tc could fear so have deceived “ me, that I did not know your voice or “ person ? And yet, methought, as you “ leaned against this pedestal, your figure “ appeared tall beyond ordinary height.”

“ I lean against a pedestal ! Holy Mo-“ ther ! why thou hast had a vision, daughter," said the friar, smiling, whose round plump stature must have suffered a strange metamorphose to have answered* Imogen's description.

352

THE NOVICE OF

“ Was it not you, father, who caught u me as I sank to the earth

“ Marry no ! I found thee seated here “ pale and lifeless, as I was returning to “ my convent, after shriving the sister u Agnes, who is fast following the ca-“ noness.”

“And saw you no one?” demanded Imogen.

“ None but thee,” said the father ; “ and " truly thou didst startle me, and not a “ little, daughter.”

Imogen then related the circumstance of he|r having loitered at the grave of her departed friend, and of the figure that met her eye and addressed her.

The father was too superstitious not to express some emotion at the detail; until the probability suggested itself, that either the solemnity and gloom of the place, in conjunction with Imogen’s fears, had conjured up the phantom, or that some person among the few of the neighbouring peasantry who were present at the funeral

ST. DOMINICK.

253

obsequies had loitered behind,, quieted the friar’s suspicions of a supernatural intruder ; and holding up his lantern, and perceiving the door still open by which the peasantry usually entered, he exclaimed, ’Tis as I suspected : some pious hind “ was keeping his vigil at the shrine of “ bis patron saint, and your spectral ap-“ pearance scared him from his devotion.” Imogen was in no temper of mind to argue the point, however she might differ in opinion from the friar ; who, drawing her arm through his own, conducted her to the convent, where she joined a few of the nuns, who were sitting up with a sick sister ;—and while the curious legend, holy fable, or wondrous tale, went round with ceaseless garrulity, the novice remained silent and thoughtful, wholly occupied with those various interesting and melancholy reflections which the death of the canoness and her own situation had awakened ; nor was the mysterious stranger forgotten. The imagination of Imo-

254

TUE NOVICE OF

gen was too romantic not to give the occurrence all the high coloring of the marvellous; and the voice and address of the incognito was of too singular and superior a nature to induce her to coincide with father Philip. “ It is all a mystery/* mentally exclaimed Imogen, “ and cer-tainly a mystery connected with the death of the canoness/'

While she was thus occupied, the nuns turned the conversation on the death of the canoncss ; and the novice learned that a dispensation from the pope, enabling the sister Pasiphiie to remove from the convent for the recovery of her health, had been brought by two strangers of noble appearance, who seemed much afHicted at the tidings of her death, and who immediately rode away, without stopping to take the refreshments prepared for them in the refectory.

Imogen was now certain that one of those strangers was the person who addressed her; yet willing to avoid the tire-

ST. DOMINICK.

255

some questions and wondering curiosity of the nuns, she forbore making any mention of her adventure ; and the next morning reached the chateau before her absence during the night had been noticed, while the nuns took leave of her as one from whom, in a day or two, they should part no more.

When a strong mind is thrown wholly on itself, it becomes fertile in resources. " I must now/’ said Imogen, cc depend “ on myself alone.” This reflection gave her an oslensibility in her own estimation she could not feel while depending on the exertions of the canoness. She had money, more than she believed she should ever have occasion for; and she had a let-* ter to secure her a reception with Madame de Rosemont. x\nd now her first and favorite plan of eloping in the disguise of a minstrel again recurred to her mind, as the only one she could adopt. Yet even to effect this, it was requisite to have some assistance; and there was

THE XOVICE OF

but one person to whom she could apply —that person was Theodore the page.

The modesty of her nature, and some degree of pride incident to her character, had prevented her hitherto from noticing the page by the least familiarity; she thought their situations assimilated too closely to admit of the shadow of freedom on her part; and the occasional modest gallantries of the young page rendered her still more diffident of admittingany on his. Their only intercourse, for two years that they had been beneath the same roof together, had been a repeated offer of little services, or oblique encomiums on his side, and of grateful refusals or modest rejections on her’s. A sense of the discovery she was aboutto demand, overwhelmed her with confusion, as she entered the apartment where Theodore, who had read all the romances of the age, sat absorbed in a book. On Imogen’s entrance he flung it down, and rose respectfully. “ 1 fear,” said Imogen, “ I have interrupted your

ST. DOMINICK.

257

ec

it

ec

ec

cc

ci

if

it

ft

<e

ct

<<

cc

cc

cc

•cc

1C

tc

studies ?”—“ ’Tis true, mademoiselle, you have ; but how much more delightful is such interruption than any pursuit it could interfere with !”

“ Perhaps,” said Imogen, " thou wert quarreling with thy author, and glad of an opportunity to fling him aside.”

“ Pardon me, I was much interested in the story : ’tis of a brave and noble knight, who rescued by his single arm a beautiful and amiable lady from the power of two guardians, who would have forced her into a convent, to possess themselves of her fortune. Oh, how happy are such knights !” tc Dost thou think so, Theodore ? and wouldst thou too volunteer in the service of the suffering and oppressed, did an opportunity occur?”

<c Would I ? would IPO God ! but you do not, will not, know my heart.”

" I think I do, Theodore ; for I believe it noble, generous, and benevolent : else

258

THE NOVICE OF

“ would I not repose that confidence in “ thee i am now on the point of doing/' <( A confidence, and in me, holy Mo-ther ! you cannot mean it?”

Not if you refuse to receive it, Theo-“ dore.”

“ I refuse ! I swear by all 1 hold dear to “ consecrate my life to your service.”

“ Nay, my kind friend, 1 demand no Cf protestations ” She then mentioned her determination of avoiding a mode of life, to which slu* had objections, which neither her reason nor conscience could get over; her expectation of an asylum with madame de Rosemont; with every other circumstance relative to the intention she had formed.

Theodore listened to her in amazement too great for utterance. What, made-<c moiselle, you who have been always “ looked up to as a saint ; you who have “ been always intended for a nun ; *tis ft most strange, and yet most natural: be-(C sides, wherever you think best must be

ST. DOMINICK.

259

ff so; and oh, were yon to remain here, “ how delighted should I be at your de-ff termination ! and when you leave the “ chateau, who will care to remain in it? " Oh, did you but know how your idea cheered its solitude, how often the sight “ of you passing through the anti-cham-“ her has revived my spirits for a whole “ day ! When I looked on you as a sa-“ cred being consecrated to God, I be-“ lieved it almost a sin to think of you, but “ as one does of their patron saint ; and “ then, holy Mother! what pains did I “ take to stifle even—But your pardon, “ mademoiselle, I would not offend you “ for the world.—You were speaking of “ your escape from the chateau. I do be-“ lieve the lady Magdelaine has it much “ at heart to make you a nun, whether <{ your vocation lies that way or no ; and “ it will not be easy to get clear of her if vigilance : where does the lady Ilose-“■ mont reside ?’*

Imogen drew from her bosom the letter

260

THE NOVICE OP

addressed to madame de Rosemont. Theodore reading in the superscription that her chateau lay on the skirts of Picardy, and within three leagues of the city of Soissons, suddenly exclaimed : “ Nothing can be “ more à-propos. You must know, ma-(c demoiselle, there lives about two leagues “ from the chateau a widow and two sons, <f who deal largely in the frieze cloths for “ which this province is so famous ; their u chief market is at Soissons, and since “ this part of the country has been so “ disturbed, they carry their merchandize “ by water, and coast along the Aisne.— “ Of a fine evening you could almost see “ the smoke of their chimney across the <e river from your window; they are “ plain, simple, and credulous, and differ “ in no respect from the peasantry, ex-“ cept in being somewhat more opulent. Cf You know, mademoiselle, I have some te skill in pharmacy, having culled simples “ and attended the laboratory of the Cis-“ tercian brothers at St. Menhoulm, until

SX- DOMINICK.

261

“ recommended to the lady Magdelaine “ by father Anselm. The poor people “ think me skilful ; and having had the rt good fortune to cure one of the widow's “ sons of a disorder in his leg, they fancy <c themselves beholden to serve me to the “ utmost extent of their power. Sunday sf is the day appointed for you to enter “ your holy profession—Saturday is the " market of Soissons ; these good people “ will set out with their merchandize early “ on Friday morning ; I will recommend “ you to their protection as a young rela-“ tion of my own, going into the service of a lady in Picardy. When you are “ once at Soissons, they will easily find a “ mode of conveyance for you to the cha-u teau at Rosemont.99

The sanguine Imogen eagerly caught at this project, and thanked Theodore with tearg and smiles of gratitude. “ But “ art thou sure, my kind friend,” said she, “ that these people willalford me the pro-“ tection you suppose? and how will you

26ci

THE NOVICE OF

ff be able to see them between this and “ to-morrow morning*, when you say they {< set out on their journey ?”

,c Oh, easily, mademoiselle : I shall pad-“ die the little pleasure-boat across the “ Aisne, instead of going the high road; “ by which means 1 shall reach their cot-tage in less than an hour and a half, u and shall be back by the time my lady “ gjoes to supper. Meanwhile, pack up <<r Whatever you may think necessary to “ take with you; and three hours after “ midnight, when the moon will rise, the “ splashing of the oars beneath your win-ec dow will be the signal of departure/' Suppose," said Imogen, after a moment’s pause, and in some confusion, “ I u were to disguise myself as a minstrel— “ might not a man’s garb be some protec-" tion ?"

“ Doubtless, mademoiselle : neither “ your sex, face, nor form, are much cal-culated to insure your safety in an ad-f< venture such as you are now on the point

ST. DOMINICK.

263

of entering ; and a minstrel’s garb is a (l passport every where. Yet should you assume it, I see no necessity for your “ doing so until you arrive at Soissons. “ The most dangerous part of your jour-“ ney will be the three leagues between “ Soissons and De Rosemont: the war te rages in Picardy ; the king has invested <c Laon; and the two armies are scattered tc in every direction.”

,r Is the minstrel’s robe still lying in his ff apartment ?” asked Imogen, colouring. “ It is, mademoiselle : I will leave it in your room with a doublet and hose of my own ; we are, I think, much of a size ; the minstrel was of a lofty sta-" ture.”

“ lie was so,” said Imogen, sighing.

“ Do you think you will meet this min-" strel, mademoiselle,” said the page with a penetrating smile, f' when you enter the “ world?”

" Good heavens! no; why should you ‘f think so?”

264

THE NOTICE OF

“ May I entreat your pardon ? In truth " I know not why I think so; but I am “ certain that were it so, the minstrel "would not regret the circumstance; yet “ his never returning here, with such in-“ ducements,—except indeed he—”

“ Theodore,” interrupted Imogen, “ it “ were well we now parted, our long con-“ ference may else excite suspicion/' cf True, mademoiselle; it is selfish in me “ to wish to prolong my own happiness, “ at the expence of endangering your’s ;

<f but a conversation with you is so---

" Well, I am gone, mademoiselle: if you “ loiter here about nine o’clock this even-ee ing, I shall have returned from the cot-“ tage of dame Margueretta, and will “ meet you here.”

Theodore then set out on his little friendly expedition ; and Imogen attended lady Magdclaine, as she believed and hoped, for the last time, in her study.

At the hour Theodore had appointed, Imogen found him in the anti-chamber;

ST. DOMINICK.

265

he had only time to tell her that he had arranged every thing with the dame Mag-gueretta, when the lady Magdelaine’sbell summoned him to the supper-room,, where Imogen also adjourned, and took her seat as usual at the table.

What a heart throbbed in her bosom, during the most tedious supper she had ever sat down to! The friar, who was doing all possible justice to a very fine capon, was silently busy till the cloth was removed : when he amply made up for his taciturnity, by expatiating on the art of cookery, its rise, progress, and decline among the ancients, and its revival in the present day ; inveighing against the sin of intemperance, and on the benefit resulting from spare diet ; repeating some lines of Horace, descriptive of

£ A noble pair of brothers, who On nightingales of monstrous purchase diu’d;*

with an appropriate eulogium on the Spar -tan brown bread and black broth; and

VOL. I.	N

THE NOVICE OF

with the abstemious vehemence of an Indian bramin, after having* feasted with the voluptuous delicacy of an Apicius. At last, having finished a bottle of vin de pays, he rose to retire. The lady Mag-delaine arose at the same time.

The heart, when placed in a new situation, betrays emotions of which it believed itself incapable, until called into existence by the pressure of circumstances hitherto inexperienced. Imogen received the father’s benediction with an emotion that almost tempted her to press the hand that waved over her bending head ; and when she wished the lady Magdelaine goodnight, she did it in a tone so full of tenderness, that the lady Magdelaine seemed to catch the infection of kindness, and, instead of her usual formal salute, returned, “ God bless you, child!” Never had her sharpest severity gone so closely to the heart of Imogen. " It is probable,” said Imogen, as she looked after them as they proceeded by different ways to their re-



ST. DOMINICK.	267

spective apartments, “ I shall never see “ you more.” In that reflection all their former unkindness was forgotten. Imogen could recollect nothing but the pains the friar had taken with her in her studies, and the condescension with which the lady Magdelaine had lately asked her opinion upon several occasions. Imogen returned to her chamber, and found the minstrel's robe, with part of the page’s dress on her bed: these she packed up with a small parcel of linen ; then seating herself at the casement, passed the remainder of the night, so pregnant with event, in a variety of conflicting and opposite reflections. The hope of emancipation from impending evils; the fears natural in an attempt so hazardous to a mind equally ignorant of enterprize and vicissitude; tire sanguine expectation of success, and the dread of failure; all contributed to agitate the mind of Imogen, and at intervals nearly overthrew every intention, and staggered every resolve. At last the clock

THE NOVICE OF

struck three, the moon arose from behind the spires of St. Dominick, and Imogen heard the splashing of the oar beneath her casement : she arose, wrapt a large cloke round her, took her little parcel in one hand, a small lute in the other, as a substitute for a harp in her personification of the minstrel; and proceeded with a noiseless step and beating heart to the gallery, which opened by a glass door on the terrace, where Theodore met her. He took her parcel and lute ; and, drawing her arm through his, they proceeded in silence till they descended a flight of marble steps, at the foot of which the boat was moored. Theodore placed his trembling charge in it ; and, seating himself opposite to her, plied the oar, which sparkled with the brilliant drops of the moon-light wave. As they glided from the shore, the dark scenery of the chateau and the forest de Mont-morell assumed an awful and impressive aspect. The thoughts of Imogen were wholly absorbed in their contemplation :

ST. DOMINICK.

269

those local attachments which a warm and affectionate heart will form even for inanimate objects, to which it has been long habituated, rushed on her mind ; and in the moment of her parting with them for ever, assumed an interest her heart before had never confest. Every spot, as it receded from her gaze, recollection consecrated to some novel sensation, some new-born idea, some developed thought ; and the soft regret which attends a final separation from things grateful from habit, but in themselves inconsequential, mingled with the joyous emotion of liberty regained, and hopes almost ratified, which thrilled with ardent pulsation on every fibre of her heart. Then apostrophizing the sombre pile on which her gaze was fastened, she mentally exclaimed, Alas! how many weary hours and restless days have I passed within the confines of thy gloomy walls! “ There my heart has vainly throbbed to “ disclose the lively emotions it cherished ; <f there have my eyes vainly cast round

270

THE NOVICE OF

rc their hopeless glance, nor met the look “ of sympathy they sought ; there reflec-“ tion shed her light on my mind only to “ make me conscious of the wretchedness “ of my destiny, and every new-born “ thought awakened but to slumber !” Then casting her eyes towards a casement brilliantly illuminated with the moonbeams, she recollected that it was there she last beheld the minstrel; that it was there she had received those vows which in her young heart awakened a bliss beyond all the joys she believed the scale of human felicity comprised! Even the recollection of that sweet though illusive moment, was fajoy past joy / “ and, “ though/' said Imogen, “experience has “ taught me it was but a rapturous dream, “ I would not part with the emotions the “ remembrance of that dream excites, for “ all tire sober contentment and unalloyed iC satisfaction that I may yet, that I have “ hitherto enjoyed, f Alas ! that the hap-“ piest moment of life should have been

ST. DOMINICK.

271

cr the most deceitful.” Her half-articulated exclamation was accompanied by tears which coursed each other down her cheek.

ei Ah, mademoiselle!” said the page, who had long and silently observed the varying emotions of her expressive and eloquent countenance, “ it is for those “ only to weep whom you leave behind u you. "Tis certain I always knew you. “ were to leave us some time or other ; tf but still you would have remained in the f‘ neighbourhood; and on a festival dav,

O’	j	*

“ when I attended the church of St. Do-“ minick, I should hear your sweet voice, “ and know I was under the same roof with you : but now, now you are free, “ and it is no sin to think of you. But pardon me, I would not for the world “ say any thing to offend you ; I always “ believed you were intended for some-“ thing great ; I shall never forget the " horoscope cast for you by the old astro-loger the last day he visited the chateau.

THE NOVICE OF

“ Yet I once read in a romance, of a ff page who fell in love with the very lady “ he served: it was indeed audacious, but “ then there is no dictating to the heart; do you think there is, mademoiselle ?”

“ I should hope so, Theodore/’ said Imogen with a sigh ; else wherefore was <f reason bestowed on us ? The best “ heart is liable to become the sport of its “ own impulse ; and even though its pro-“ pcnsities individually considered may ‘f be consonant to virtue, yet relatively “ they may be inimical to prudence, jus-ff tice, and the happiness of others, as well as our ow n.”

“ ’Tis very true, mademoiselle ; you al-ways speak, think, and look, like an an-gel. We should not attach ourselves “ to an object we can never possess ; not ft that it is wrong to love what is most ei worthy of being loved. Oh no ! but to tf encourage an inclination detrimental to our peace, without even a hope of gra-tifying it, is at once sinful and childish. “ Is it not so, mademoiselle ?”

ST. DOMINICK.

213

“ I fear so, Theodore/’ sighed Imogen ; and they both remained silent till the boat put into a little harbour that almost bathed the walls of dame Margueretta’s cottage. The dawn was already breaking in the east, a faint tint of yellow gleamed on the horizon, and the morning planet still survived the lesser lights of the firmament; while, opposed to the glowing flush of strengthening day, the moon appeared but as a luminous vapour. Moored to the bank lay a package-boat ; and Theodore, steering clear of it, anchored his little bark to the stump of a decaying willow, whose drooping boughs Hung their shade across it ; he then jumped on the bank, and rapped at the cottage-door. A light soon appeared in the casement, and the next moment he was admitted. When he returned to Imogen he was accompanied by a middle-aged woman, habited in the peasant dress of the country, and who welcomed her in a patois dialect so broad and unintelligible, that Imogen only under-n 2

£74

THE NOVICE OF

stood her courteous reception by the air of native kindness which accompanied it.— She conducted her young and timid protegee to a small room, where two comely youths were at breakfast. Imogen and the page gratefully partook of the rural fare, pressed on them by their hosts with all the eagerness of unpolished hospitality. The meal being finished, the two young men and their mother went out to the boat; and as Imogen observed them stowing in the last parcel of their frieze merchandize, she turned to Theodore, and having thanked him in a voice scarcely articulate from emotion, she added, “ And Ct now, my kind friend, it would ease my “ heart of its fears on your account, lest ct your absence should be discovered, did tf I see you row back towards the chateau, “ whose turrets the morning light renders “ discernible even at this distance/’

Ah!” said the page, brushing a tear from his cheek, “ I shall be there loo soon !”

ST. DOMINICK.

275

e‘ How thy kindness affects me !” said Imogen, applying her handkerchief to her eyes; " yet how I envy thee thy feelings’ “ for dear to a heart like thine must be “ the consciousness of a benevolent ac-,f tion performed for another at the risk of ff injuring ourselves. Pure disinterested “ humanity ! this is thy blessed attribute • “ and while the heart of Imogen shall fe throb with life, the generosity of Theo-dore shall live among its most grateful “ recollections.”

. ff O heavens! how you overpower me ! tf To succour the oppressed is an impulse <£ of the heart, not an effort of the mind— fc it is a gratification, not a duty. I re~ member it was thus you spoke when I Ci would have thanked you for clearing my “ character to lady Magdelaine,, after the “ envious Bernardine had so grossly as-ef persed it. I remember too, when I was “ on the point of being discharged, and “ you pleaded for me with tears, and of-ft fered me all the money you had to send

27 6

THE NOVICE OF

“ my mother, for that Bernardine had de-iC prived me of, and—39

“ Nay, no more, I entreat no more/' interrupted Imogen; and at that moment the woman entered to tell her all was ready for their departure.

Imogen presented her hand to Theodore ; he led her out in silence, placed her in the boat, fixed her parcel and lute beside her, and held the hand she presented him for more than a minute to his lips; and then, unable even to utter an adieu, leapt on shore. The little bark glided swiftly away. Theodore, with folded arms and watery eyes, pursued it with his gaze.

Imogen kissed the end of her veil, and waved it in the air. Theodore returned the salute with his hat; and the next moment the serpentine course of the river stole her from his view. The page then entered his little boat with a weary and desponding heart, and reached the chateau de Montmorell ere its inhabitants

ST. DOMINICK.

277

had awakened to the dull round of their accustomed avocations.

CHAP. XI.

One out of sorts with fortune.*

Sli AKSPEARE.

Io vado—

Fuggiliva Taminga—e chi sa dore

Puo guidarmi il destin ?

Metàstasio.

SWIFTER than the course of the rapid stream over which she glided flowed the thoughts of Imogen as she pursued her voyage along the delicious shores of the Aisne. <f Some natural tears she dropt, “ but dried them soon and the timid apprehensions, the sombre doubts, that had agitated her mind, vanished before the cheering beams of hope. As the mists of twilight gradually disappeared to her eye before the rising refulgence of the sun, all ,f the melodies of mornJ’ burst on

278

THE NOVICE OF

her ear, all the awakened beauties of nature blushed on her view ; and while the lowing of the herds, the wild tone of the huntsman’s horn, or the warlike blast of the trumpet’s shriller notes, died away among the echoes of the hills, the boat glided through a changeful scenery, over which the enthusiast fancy of the young Imogen roved with unsated delight.—

O	O

Meantime her female companion seemed lost in silent calculation of her expected profits, which appeared by her reckoning on her fingers; while the two boys alternately sung a hymn to the Virgin, or a ballad of Rollo; and sometimes raised their sparkling oars to point out a strag-glingparty of the military, who held their outposts on the summit of a distant eminence, and who had come down to the skirts of an extensive orchard to regale themselves with the delicious fruit it afforded.

Imogen’s fellow-travellers having pro* vided themselves with refreshments, about

ST. DOMINICK.

279

noon they landed, and spread their simple repast beneath the shelter of a rock, whose high and overhanging points were shaded with pine and elder, amidst whose interwoven branches the verlical beams of the meridian sun played without incommoding the travellers. Over the hours of social enjoyment care holds no jurisdiction. The old woman ceased to calculate, and was loquaciously gay ; whilethe young men, more alive to the beauties of a face a large hat (now thrown on one side) no longer concealed, collected the choicest wild flowers the spot afforded, and presented them as a tribute of homage to the charms of their lovely fellow-traveller; while the young heart of Imogen, ever ready to expand its affectionate powers to the least influence of kindness, entered with interest into the village politics and domestic tales of the dame and hersons, though with difficulty understood; and catching up their dialect, with all the most happy powers of imitation which she so

280

THE NOVICE OF

pre-eminently possessed, repeated (as they continued their voyage) several legends, and sung some provincial ballads, which she accompanied on her lute.

•That witchcraft which lurked in the manners of their fair companion stole insensibly on the hearts of the simple peasants; the evening unobserved fled on with hasty strides, and the last gleam of the setting sun illuminated the high tops of the forest of Folambray, which appeared, at the distance it was observed, like a dark cloud tinged with living gold,, as the spires of Soissons rose on their view. Within half a league of the city they landed at a little cabaret, where they were to put up for the night.

It was a matter of some debate with Imogen and her new friends whether she would set off that evening to the chateau de Rosemont, with Ilobichon, the younger of the boys, on horseback, or wait till the following morning, and hire a guide at the cabaret; for Robichop would be un-

ST. DOMINICK.

2S1

der the necessity of attending the market with his mother by dawn the next day.— Extreme impatience to arrive at the end of her journey, and her reluctance to trust herself to a strange guide, or remain longer at the cabaret, now thronged with rude and riotous people, who put up with their merchandise for the night, induced her to adopt the former plan, to which Theodore had strongly advised her ; and though her host of the cabaret assured her the road to the chateau de Rosemont was neither dangerous nor frequented, yet she thought it advisable to adopt the disguise with which she had furnished herself, as more appropriate to her expedition than the light and singular habit of a novice of St. Dominick.

Having expressed her intention to her female protectress, who highly approved of it, while Robichon got the horse ready, Imogen exchanged her dress for that of a minstrel ; while modesty trembled at the mandate necessity imposed, and blushed

2S2

THE NOVICE OF

“ celestial rosy red” in contemplating a transformation which was to secure the sensitive feelings of delicacy from a still greater violation.

As soon as she was dressed, she presented two pieces of gold to the dame Marguerette, influenced rather by the suggestion of her generosity than her prudence in the donation : for amidst the thanks with which the dame overwhelmed her lurked surprise, curiosity, and suspicion ; and she now, for the first time, became importunate in her enquiries and hints, which Imogen, to avoid, seemed not to understand. Robichon now led a horse to the door, for the hire of which Imogen had paid. Imogen flung the string of her lute over her shoulder; and, being placed on horseback behind Robichon, she bid adieu to dame Marguerette and her eldest son, and struck off in a path which lay to the west of Soissons.

Athough the sun had set some minutes before they left the door of the cabaret.

ST. DOMINICK.

283

a flood of crimson light bathed the horizon, reflected on every object a deep red tint, and gave to scenes of changeful variety, through which the travellers passed, that warm glow of colouring which so eminently characterizes the animated landscapes of Claude Lorraine, until the last sweet solemn hour of

“ Grey-hooded even,

“ Like a sad votaristin palmer’s weeds,

“ Rose from the hindmost wheels of Phœbus’ car;”

and as the obscurity of twilight veiled in gradual oblivion those picturesque and varying objects which had interested her taste or given play to her imagination, Imogen’s thoughts revolved wholly on herself, and the reception she would meet with from the lady de Rosemont; and a thousand timid fears insinuated themselves into à heart too anxious to please not to be doubtful of success, and which had sketched the reception of the new protectress under a thousand aspects that alter-

2S4

THE NOVICE OF

nately animated her hopes or strengthened lier apprehensions. “ How much/' thought Imogen, “ will the good madame de Rosemont be shocked, when at the “ same moment she will receive her friend's letter and an account of her “ death ! Surely the sense of affliction in “ ourselves can be scarcely more dreadful than that of awakening it in another. It iC is entering a family under very gloomy iC auspices, to be first known to it as the u bearer of melancholy tidings.”

I hope, mademoiselle,” said Robichon, as he jogged on with undeviating pace, “ that you are not afraid.”

“Afraid, good Robichon, of what?” said Imogen, who now first observed the loneliness of their path, which lay through a wild and desolate heath.-

“ Of what! nay, I know not, made-“ moiselle ; but one would as soon not ff travel at this dead hour of the night if ff one could help it. Somehow, although (f I defy the devil and all his works, I

ST. DOMIX4CK.

285

“ never care to go the length of myself “ when once the sun sets behind our moun-“ tains: albeit our father Francisco gave “ me a charm against evil spirits ; see, “ mademoiselle, here it is, enclosed in this “ little reliquary, which was my great-“ grandfather’s ; ’tis but a little of the " sand scraped off the golden cockle-shell of St. Michael, yet 1 warrant of marvel-‘c ous great power.”

“ 1 fear no evil spirits,” said Imogen, casting round a timid glance ; <f and hea-“ ven, I trust, will protect us from mortal “ enemies.”

“ Now I’ll be sworn, mademoiselle, ’an fr I would rather meet a troop of arque-“ busiers, with their short fusees, long ra-“ piers, and murdering faces, than one sin-“ gle spirit. Holy St. Michael, what is " that standing near the ruins of yonder “ watch-tower ? The whole army of “ blessed martyrs take us into their care!” “ In good sooth,” said Imogen, recovering from momentary horror, “ thou

286

THE NOVICE OF

“ frightenest me: I see nothing near the ff watch-tower buta vvhithered tree. Come, <f banish thy fears,, and I will tell thee a pleasant tale for thy amusement; ’tis u the wondrous tragedy of the Green Lady *f and the Dwarf of the Hills.”

“ Do so, mademoiselle; it gladdens my “ very heart to hear a marvelous pleasant “ tale, and never did I hear a story of a <f dwarf that was not full of cunning de-“ vice.”

. Well then, first tell me how far may <{ we be from de Rosemont?”

" A league from the watch-tower, “ which in former times belonged to the seigneurie of de Rosemont. I know “ every step of the road as well as my beads. Before the troubles broke out in Picardy we carried our merchandize Cf into the neighbourhood of the chateau. “ But I prithee, demoiselle, let us have thy pleasant story.

“Well then, Roblphon, mend thy <f pace, and thus we begin : It was about Cf the reign of Louis the Twelfth—”



ST. DOMINICK.

2S7

" He was a saint, mademoiselle, was he €t not?" said Robichon, crossing himself devoutly.

" Not by the calendar/* said Imogen smiling, " but he was the father of his “ people. It was in his reign that an an-“ cient castle stood at the foot of mount " Cenis."

u My grandam has a story that begins '•just so/’ said Robichon, "only that " instead of mount Cenis, ’tis the Vauge "mountains. But I cry your mercy; " proceed, mademoiselle.’'

" This castle was the residence of a

" lady, who------Do you not hear the

" distant sound of horses’ feet ?”

" MethinksI do/7 said Robichon, “yet " I see nothing. We are not very far *' from the forest of Folambray, of which " there is a dreadful story of a white steed. “ The story runs thus : It was—"

" Merciful God !" said Imogen, <6 if *' the forest, should be a shelter for ban-« dittii”

2S8

THE NOVICE OF

“ Lord help thee, lady ! the whole king-“ dom is a shelter lor them ; forgo which way you will, you are sure of being “ murdered and plundered into the bar-“ gain.’'

At that moment, by the light of the coruscations which flashed in the atmosphere, Imogen perceived a band of horsemen descend from the opposite hill. She could scarcely articulate, c‘ Fly, or we are " lostl” while Robichon, equally intimidated, turned off the high road, and galloped with the utmost speed down a narrow alley, impenetrable from the gloom of the trees which shaded it. They had gone more than half a league before Robichon checked his horse ; then listening for a moment, and hearing no sound but the melancholy groans of the forest agitated by the gusts of rising wind, he exclaimed, breathlessly and still trerhbling, <c Well, mademoiselle, I believe we have “ distanced them for this time ; and by the length of way we have gone, I wot

ST. DOMINICK.

2S0

<c we cannot be far from the chateau.”— “ But you seem to forget, Robichon,” said the still-agitated Imogen, that, “ though we have gone a considerable “ distance, we have taken a road direcfiy 'f opposite to that which led to de Rose-" mont.”

“ Ventre Dieu! I never thought of ‘f that; but there are so many little zig-“ zag ways about these forests, which the “ peasants cut for themselves, that I doubt (C not this same path will lead to the cha-“ teau; and I am much mistaken if those “ are not its turrets rising to the left.” i “ We are certainly near a chateau,” said Imogen, whose heart bounded at the conviction; “ but whether it be the cha-‘f teau de Rosemont—”

“ It can be no other,” said Robichon. Less than a quarter of an hour’s ride brought them before the portals of the chateau. It was a vast and frowning edifice, flanked on all sides by lofty round towers, and involved in an air of melan-



VOL. I.

O

290

THE NOVICE OE

choly gloom, which the solemnity and darkness of midnight heightened almost to desolation.

Are you certain that this is the cha-“ teau de Rosemont?” demanded Imogen, while a chillness crept through .her veins as she contemplated this great and sombre structure of feudal power.

“ Morally certain,” replied Robichon, alighting, and heartily weary of his journey, which his wishes led him to believe was now at an end. *

<{ The family are retired to rest, I fear,” said Imogen.

We shall soon awaken them,” said Robichon, taking hold of a horn that hung by a brass chain from the outer gate, and sounding a blast that seemed to shake the

CD

whole building, and was repeatedly reverberated among the surrounding hills. In a few minutes a light appeared in an upper casement of one of the towers, which was cautiously opened ; and a man, holding

ST. DOMINICK.

291

out a lantern, demanded, “ Who sounded “ at the horn ?”

“ A friend, who wants admittance,” said Robichon.

“ That is more easily asked than grant-ed,” returned the man.

“ I pray you, good friend, inform us,” said Imogen, if this is the chateau de ,f- Rosemont ?”

“ Why, here are two friends instead of ff one,” said the man, who want admit-‘f tance,” holding down his lantern ; ffbut ~ what boots it to thee to know, young “ sir ? These are no times to admit nightly “ wanderers. Thou hadst better not lose thy time parleying here, so good night.” “ We are no wanderers,” said Imogen eagerly. “ This youth is my guide, who “ returns when he sees me safely lodged “ within the gates of the chateau de Rose-“ mont.M

“ Marry, then it will be long ere he re-“ turns; but what is thy business here?” “ To deliver a letter and a packet of

292

TUE NOVICE OF

“ some consequence to the lady de Rose-" mont."

‘r O ho ! a packet of consequence ! Well, tarry there a moment, and I will “ be 'with thee presently.”

The casement was then closed, and the light retired.

It was near a quarter of an hour before the window was again opened. “ The “ lady de Rosemont is retired to rest said the same voice ; but hie thee to the postern gate to the left of this tower, and thou shalt obtain admittance.”

“ Thank heaven then!” said Imogen, “ this is the chateau de Rosemont.”

“ Aye, aye, I could not be mistaken,” said Robichon, leading round the horse ; and by the time he had lifted her off the gate was unbarred, and a naan appeared with a lantern. By his voice Imogen knew it was the same she had already spoken to.

Robichon gave her little parcel into the hands of the mans who wrapped in a long

ST. DOMINICK.

293

dark cloke, scowled a penetrating glance at the two young strangers, and exclaimed in a surly tone to Robiclion, I have “ received no orders to admit you.”

ft Nay,” said Robiclion, Cf and though cr thou hadst it would matter nought, for fc I could not tarry if I would ; so spare “ thy excuses, good master churl.”

Imogen drew her purse from the pocket, put a gold piece into Robichon’s hand, and thanked him for his protection. Ro-bichon would have spoken, but the man rudely pushed him out, and said, as he barred the gate, “ By the mass that fellow has as much jabber as an old woman.” He then proceeded, followed by Imogen, through a spacious court surrounded by a parapet wall, and entered a large folding gate, which he barred after him, as he had done the former. Imogen found herself in a large Gothic hall, at the further end of which an expiring fire sent forth a transitory flame. Her conductor (whom she supposed to be the porter) raked up

2Mt

THE NOVICE OF

the dying embers, and drew a stool for her to be seated. While he was thus employed, she stole a timid glance at his countenance, whose natural expression of fqro* city w'as only tempered by the lines of cunning and duplicity which marked it ! and as the brightening embers cast a red tint on his olive complexion, and his scowling eye rolled on the young stranger in silent but penetrating observation, awed even into horror, she timidly withdrew her’s ; then cast a trembling look round the vast gloom that surrounded her, and sank almost lifeless on the stool.

“ And is your business with the lady de Rosemont so pressing that you must <e see lier to-night?” asked her companion, looking keenly under her hat.

“ I should indeed wish it,” said Imogen, whose heart revived from its transitory terrors at the sound of madame de llosemonfs name ; yet I should be sorry “ to disturb her if she has retired to rest.” <{ Oh, for that she has been in bed

ST. DOMINICK.

295

(e these three hours ; but give me your “ packets, and I will have them delivered " to her.”

“ Pardon me.” said Imogen, I was “ desired to deliver them into no hands “ but madame de Rosemout’s.”

<f Is that the case? well, madame shall “ be informed of your arrival.” He then took his lantern, and walked away.

Imogen, who followed with her eye his tall lean figure as it glided along the passages, saw him ascend a flight of stairs; and, when he disappeared, heard two doors, one more distant than the other, clap after him. A thousand vague fears and suspicions took possession of her imagination ; which, alive to every impression, was but too liable to exaggerate every evil, as it exalted every good. Yet when after a few minutes’ absence the man returned, and informed her the lady de Rosemont was ready to receive her, her fears dissipated, and she arose to follow him with all the sanguine ardour of

296

THE NOVICE OF

lively expectation springing from the bosom of gloomy doubt. Having ascended the stairs, passed along a corridor, and entered a suite of rooms, which, vast, gloomy, and cold, betrayed every vestige of decay and desolation, they reached a door which terminated the suite. Her guide then looked round, and, with a smile of indescribable expression, said, " Come, young sir, prepare your credentials;” and opening the door, desired her to walk in. Imogen had scarcely entered the threshold, when, observing the impenetrable darkness of the apartment, she started back; but the guide, pushing her forward, with a savage laugh, closed the door, and locked it on the outside. Imogen, actuated only by the impulse of terror, shrieked, and attempted to force the bolt; but, overcome by her fruitless endeavours, sank to the earth ; while the footsteps of her conductor echoed on her ear till they at last died away into distance.

It was now the conviction fully flashed

ST. DOMINICK.

297

on her mind that she was not in the chateau de Rosemont ; but that the simple llo-bichon had been deceived by the darkness of the night and his own impatience to return ; and that it was probable she was now in the power of a band of outlaws or midnight murderers, who had found an asylum amidst the ruins of this vast and desolated edifice. The emotions which this belief awakened were indescribable.

As soon as her eye was familiarised in some degree to the obscurity in which she was involved, she observed the apartment, like the rest through which she had passed, was lofty and spacious ; and though the moon had not risen, the misty light of a cloudless firmament was admitted by a high spiral casement, and reflected on a range of black marble pillars which ran along one side of the apartment. Though without even a hope of escaping, Imogen arose, and, as well as her trembling limbs could support her, examined the walls of her prison; when her hand fell on a lock, o 2

296

THE NOVICE OF

which without much exertion turned, a door opened, and she found herself in what she supposed was an armoury, by the warlike accoutrements which hung* round it, and on which the rising* moon now cast her beams. F rom this observation her eye was attracted by a glimmering light which shone at a distance. Faint with terror, yet emboldened by despair, she advanced, and found it was a fracture in the lloor, which admitted a light from some apartment beneath. She bent down her eye, and plainly perceived through the aperture the ruffian who had admitted her into the chateau dozing over a blazing fire, with a tankard and a pair of pistols on a tabic beside him. At that moment a horn sounded ; he started, and, taking up a light, hurried out.

In a few minutes lie returned, followed by a party of men armed with cutlasses and pistols; and, amidst the general confusion of their voices, Imogen could only at intervals hear enough of their conver-

ST. DOMINICK.

299

sation to lead her to suppose they were the party she and Robichon had escaped, and that they had returned unsuccessful after the expedition of the night.

" What, no booty !” said her ferocious acquaintance; “mass! an’ I would not do more sitting over my tankard here “ than the whole of you put together oil " the king’s high road in the darkest night, “ why let me never rob a rich priest or C( proud financier while rny name is Ber-“ trand.”

Here the party all spoke together, and Imogen could only distinguish the voice of Bertrand, in reply, say: “ Why, I caught “ the bird just at the door of my cage.”

“ Is he worth murdering?” asked the gloomiest villain of the tribe.

ce Nay, as he seems a right delicate dainty youth, we will do the matter gen-“ tcely ; invite him to supper, and poison tf him,” said Bertrand. “ He wears the “ disguise of a minstrel, and is charged “ with a packet of importance to the lady

THE NOVICE OF

‘f de Rosemont, who resides in the neigh-“ bourhood; which 1 would have forced ec from him, but I could not read them ; and he has a purse of gold.”

“ Which thou wouldst have taken, but “ that thou darest not oppose thyself singly to a stripling,” said the gloomy villain, snatching up a pistol in one hand, and a light in the other; adding, ‘f hut you know “ me of old to be less tenacious. Where is the stranger ? if he escape the cha-rr teau we are lost : dead men tell no “ tales.”

Nay, start fair,” cried the whole party vociferously; and headed by Bertrand they all rushed out.

Imogen heard no more : the pangs of death were already on her, yet total insensibility was denied her. The murmur of voices again resounded through the vaulted apartments she had herself passed through ; the faint echo of steps became gradually louder ; she heard the Jock of the outer apartment turn ; and a sudden

ST. DOMINICK..

301

uproar of voices assailed her ears. Terror was wound up to its last strained pitch of agony and distraction. Nature could not sustain the conflict, and Imogen sa,nk lifeless to the earth.

From a state of temporary death she recovered, under all the horrors that had produced it, shaken almost to dissolution. She raised her eyes in the dreadful belief of meeting those of the murderers, and scarcely credited the testimony of her senses when she found herself still alone ; while the confused murmur of a distant uproar poured like the noise of a raging torrent on her ear, and the light which flashed through the casements shed a brilliant illumination in the apartment. The confusion of her senses rendered her doubtful of their fidelity; and, after a successful attempt to collect her scattered thoughts, she arose and approached the casements, from whence she beheld the court below filled with armed men, some bearing torches, others struggling with the ruffian

302

THE NOVICE OF

inhabitants of the chateau, and others binding them in manacles, tying them on horseback, or dragging them to light from the secret coverts whither they had tied. Several shots were fired, and the groans of the wounded were not the least audible among the various and terrifying sounds which reached the ear of the trembling and amazed spectatress. It was during the contemplation of this scene of universal confusion and horror that a thought of emancipation insinuated itself into the# beating heart of the trembling captive. Hope flattered her in the belief that the contest, which continued with unabating fury in the front of the chateau, would favour her escape by the rear; and she recollected that the windows of the apartment in which she had been first confined had a different aspect from those of the armoury. She returned thither, and to her inexpressible delight found that the door was open. Without encumbering herself with her lute, which lay on the ground from her

ST. DOMINICK.

303

first entering the room, she was hurrying away ; when (he gigantic form of a fierce arquebusier, holding a drawn sword in one hand, a torch in the other, appeared at the door. Imogen shrieked and reeled : the stranger let fall his sword, and grasped her by the shoulder. Imogen fell at his feet, and could only faintly utter, “ Mercy P

Mercy !” repeated the soldier; “ yes, “ as much mercy as your companions will et find, you shall have: as much mercy as Cf they have lately shewn to some of our “ officers, you may expect/’

“ Alas !” said Imogen, I am not their “ companion, but their prisoner. I have not been two hours within the walls of the chateau, and have reason to believe Ci that I owe my life to the arrival of those €t strangers whom I beheld in the court ,r below engaged in contest with those “ who meditated my death.”

The soldier looked at her for some time, then at her lute, which lay beside her, and

304

THE NOVICE OF

exclaimed : ft What then, you are one of those cunning musicians, who get into our camps and cause desertion amongst our men ? Mass ! it would be a good “ deed to—” He paused, and looked ferociously at her, as if more bent on revenge than tenacious of its object. Imogen, almost wholly overcome, could only faintly say, ee Save me, enable me to es-“ cape, and all I possess shall be yours.’" “ All you possess!” said the soldier with a loud laugh. " What, you will give me ° that instrument there I suppose ? well, that is generous ! Why, what the plague, did the villains throw away powder and “ shot upon such a poor little unfledged “ bird as thou ? Ventre Dieu ! thou art “ not worth the plucking!”

Imogen then drew her purse from her pocket; and, taking out the diamond ring given her by Pasiphae, she presented all the purse contained to the soldier, who looked for a moment in utter astonishment at the purse, then at the ring, and then at

ST. DOMINICK.

205

her. ff What/’ said he, f' only this for “ saving' your life ! Oh, you narrow-heart IC ed unconscionable little villain! And <f what am I to have for procuring you “ your liberty into the bargain ?”

“ I have nothing more/’ said Imogen despondingly.

“ By St. Catherine, then if you count that ring nothing, you may as well give “ it me.”

Impossible !” said Imogen ; ’tis the “ gift of a deceased friend.”

“ Yes, yes,” said the man, “ a deceased “ one, I warrant ; you took care of that.

But I have no time to spare ; my com-<f rades will be up directly: this ring and “ purse will condemn you, notwithstanding e< your disguise and your fine story ; and you will have the pleasure of accompany-“ ing your confederates to the wheel to-morrow. Aye, here they are, and " now—”

Imogen, trembling and dismayed, gave her ring; and the man, who feared lest his

306

THE NOVICE OF

rich booty should be discovered and claimed by his associates, made lier take lier lute, hurried along1 the gallery, and, descending a flight of steps, opened a postern gate, and pushed her out.

Life preserved and liberty regained left on the heart of Imogen but two predominant sentiments : joy for her unexpected deliverance, and gratitude to Providence for the protection it had afforded her. The icorld vcas now all before her, but not " where to choose;” for the darkness which hovers on the atmosphere between the flight of night and the dawn of morning prevented her the power of election. Guided rather by her ear than her eye, she only avoided that direction where the still existing uproar marked the place of action, and fled from positive danger without any thought of finding even probable safety. 13 y degrees, as she walked on with as much rapidity as the fatigue and emotion she had endured would permit, the murmur of savage contest and brutal

ST. DOMINICK.

307

ferocity died away ; and a silence, profound as the darkness which accompanied it, reigned on every side. So favourable is the heart to every species of social impression, that Imogen, as she proceeded alone in silence and in darkness, scarcely able to discern the path in which she wandered, almost regretted those terrifying but hu-7nan sounds which had broken on the deathlike stillness of solitude even to desolation ; for, after she had passed the woodland which skirted the chateau, no tree, no shrub, flung its dark outline on the unvaried gloom of the heath she traversed. Weak, trembling, and cheerless, she glided on for near half a league; till, weary beyond the power of proceeding, she seated herself on a bank beneath the umbrage of. the first tree she met; and, laying her lute by her side, determined to wait till the morninir dawn should discover some hu-man habitation, whose inhabitants could guide her to the chateau de Rosemont.

The veil of night seemed at last gra-

SOS

THE NOTICE OF

dually withdrawn, ami the landscape, though imperfect to the view, slowly un-folded its boldest features, and betrayed its minuter charms. The sober impression of dawn still diffused its chaste and reserved tints on the horizon; and the colouring of the east, as yet doubtful, by degrees assumed a richer and more determinate-glow : the last shadow of darkness faded on the west; and dawn, awakening from repose, shed her deep blushes on every object: nature reflected back the rosy influence, and, invigorated for action, poured forth with genial liberality tears that nourished, sighs that inspired, and beams that, gave anew existence to creation.

The renovated soul of the young wanderer sent up its effusions to heaven, with the mists which arose from the bosom of nature, like a fragrant incense from the altar of grateful piety; and appeared (as, refreshed and inspirited, she gazed from her solitary seat on the rising sun) like the violet which sprung wild and forlorn at her

ST. DOMINICK.

309

feet, scenting every gale with its odour, and raising its drooping head bathed in dew to the genial inlluenee of every sun beam. Imogen could not help assimilating herself to the flower; and, placing the modest blossom in her bosom, whose state of solitary desolation so strongly resembled her own, she arose, threw the string of her lute over her shoulder, and ascended an eminence which commanded an extensive view. The breeze, as it lifted the clouds from the valleys, discovered a scene rich and beautiful beyond the powers of delineation. On one side the turrets of the chateau she had so recently left rose on the hazy mists of distance; while On the other the high road wound round the base of a hill, on whose summit the purple vapours of the morning dawm still hovered.

To the road Imogen descended, as the safest and most direct she could take; and having refreshed herself at a clear stream which murmured near the pathway, she continued to wander on, till, observing a

THE NOVICE OF

small column of smoke staining the atmosphere, and something rising through the trees like a chimney, she quickened her pace, and soon arrived before a cottage which partly lay in ashes, while the smoke still ascended from its ruins, and evident traces of desolation (the grass burnt up and the pasturage destroyed) were visible on every side. Imogen paused in silent and pitying contemplation of the scene before lier, when something like a human form crept from among the ruins: it wore a female habit, and bent beneath the burthen of a fewr dried sticks. Without appearing much surprised at the fair strangers appearance, who gazed on her with horror and compassion, she said, with an air of affliction, pointing to the ruins, “ That is a sorry sight !”

“ Sorry indeed !” said Imogen.

<f This is all the benefit vve derive from civil war,” added the woman.

This was not then an accidental fire? demanded Imogen.

ST. DOM fXlCK.

311

“ No, no !” said the woman wildly ; rt I had one son fighting for the King, and “ the other for the League ; two fine “ youths ! what business had they to meddle with party ? They were happy ff and laborious^ and dear to each other; <f but their brotherly, love turned to deadly “ hatred, and — see, stranger! that withered ft spot is stained with the blood of my “ younger son, drawn by his elder bro-e< ther, because he refused to change his religion and his party !”

An expression of agony even beyond distraction invested the haggard countenance of the narrator ; and then she added, “ The fellow-soldiers of my deceased son “ murdered my first-born ; in my arms murdered him ; and consumed his corse “ with this dwelling. But hush ! be secret, <£ and 1 will show you the spot where I “ have collected his precious ashes apart from those of the ruins : oh, trust the “ mother’s heart for that ! Come, come !” she cried in a deep tone, and offering her

THE NOVICE OF

hand to Imogen with an impatient air; then, with the wild heart-piercing shriek of distraction, she exclaimed: “ Sec ! see * “ ’tis my boy!” and plunged amidst the ruins, pursuing the phantom of her own disordered imagination and broken heart.

Imogen now first perceived that she had been conversing with a maniac. Struck with horror by the discovery, and filled with the tenderest compassions for the sufferings of the unhappy and distracted mother, she tied the spot where the still sensible heart of the lunatic bled over the ashes of her murdered child ; and pursued her way, lost in those reflections her melancholy adventure had given rise to.

“ In tracing,” said she, “ the historic register of calamities which in every age tc warfare, whether foreign or domestic, “ has brought upon the human species, iC the eye dwells only upon general and rf public facts ; for the historian is but the “ recorder of battles and sieges, of victory or defeat : but the tale of woe with

ST. DOMINICK.

313

“ which the private sufferings of the indi-“ vidual could wring- the heart, steals into fc eternal oblivion with the cruelties and “ oppression that caused them.*’

As Imogen proceeded, every step presented some vestige of recent desolation ; and the road she had taken seemed totally unfrequented, although she observed the glittering of arms on the summit of a distant hill. While the timid traveller was lost in doubt whether to proceed or turn down a road that presented itself, a peasant overtook her, though almost bending beneath a load hecarried on bis shoulder. He addressed her with a smiling countenance and a courteous air. Imogen’s heartbound-edto the grateful accents of courtesy, and she returned his salute with all the kindness it was made.

It is a charming morning,” said the peasant, “ and, mort de ma vie, the sun “ looks so gay, and the air is so sweet, and every thing so smiling, that it must be “ a heart diablement lugubre that does not VOL. I.	P

TUE NOVICE OE

“ smile too. For my part, when the sun “ shines, I cannot chose but be happy : “ yet, marry, with no great reason either ; “ ’tis but one week since my little cottage “ was first plundered by one party of the “ soldiery, and then burnt by the other.

But then our grand monarque won a ff battle the same day, so my wife and I cc made a feu de joie with the ruins of our “ cottage. The next day we removed a “ little lower down the country, built a (S hut on the banks of the clearest stream “ in the world, and with some little mat-“ ter we saved from the ruin of our farm, ff have not as yet wanted the de quoi vivre. “ And you, monsieur, I suppose, are go-Cf ing to try your luck at the camp, which “ lies before Laon, some leagues off. I tf once played a little on the viol and tabor i( myself, until the steward of our seigneur “ caught me one day playing, when I should have been at work, and broke the “ viol over my head ; and so 1 never had “ the heart to play again

ST. DOMJNICK.

S15

Imogen, delighted with the naïveté of her companion, and pleased with the gay philosophy of his character, so truly French, felt that his voluntary detail of his domestic circumstances called for reciprocity of confidence, and entered, though with reservation, into the adventures of the late eventful night; throwing as much of “ the “ doublet and hose into her disposition” as might enable her to fill up, without awakening suspicion, the character she had assumed, and from which she believed she had already derived more protection than the habit of the timid novice could have insured.

“ So,” said the peasant, “I suppose you were going to look for a situation in the “ chateau de Rosemont, and had the good ie fortune to get admittance into the cha-teau Noir, the most noted nest for ban-“ ditti in the province? It was but two “ days back they fell upon two officers of ff the royal army, and murdered them in the forest of Folambray. A party of “ the soldiers have been lying in wait for

316

THE NOVICE OF

“ them ever since, and surprised them “ last night just as they had returned from “ an expedition. This morning before “ dawn I met the whole party.”

“ Then the soldiers were victorious?” said Imogen.

<c They took the villains to a man,” said the peasant.

Imogen, who dared not mention the money which she had been plundered of by the soldier, lest it should excite the suspicion of her companion, was now determined to pursue her way to the chateau de Rosemont, and enquired from the peasant the nearest road.

“Lord help thee!” said he; “why “ thou art going from it as fast as thou te canst. Rut thou seemest weary, poor “ soul! and, marry, thou dost not look as “ if thou couldst bear much fatigue ; “ therefore thou had>t better tarry at our “ hut and refresh thyself awhile, and then “ thou wilt be better able to continue thy “ journey.”

“ j am indeed young at the profession,”

ST. DOMINICK.

317

said Imogen, colouring, “ and as yet little “ inured to fatigue; besides, I have suf-tc fered much anxiety sinceyester even; I “ will therefore accept thy hospitable offer “ with gratitude.”

“ Why, that is well said,” exclaimed the peasant: “and look! yonder rises the smoke “ of our hut, just above the little cop-“ pice to the left. You must know, I have <f been on the skirts of the forestall night, “ cutting wood, which I sell at the next “ market town ; there is some hazard in “ doing it, but necessity has no law, and “ one cannot stand by and see one’s chil-“ dren starve: aye, here they are, dear “little souls! many a long look-out they “ have had since dawn for me, I warrant.” While bespoke, two lovely boys and a little girl ran towards him; he laid down his burthen to kiss and give them his blessing, which he did with an air of patriarchal tenderness and piety. The two boys then dragged the parcel of wood after them by the leather thong wiiich bound it; while

THE NOVICE OF

the little girl, gazing timidly on the stranger, fastened round her father’s neck, who carried her home in his arms.

At the door of the hut they were met by a young woman, whose sun-burnt but expressive face was lit up with joy and affection as she took her daughter from her husband’s arms to fill them with herself : Dearest Baptiste,” said she, wiping away the tear with which she had bedewed his cheek, as she pressed it to her own, “ I “ am so happy you are returned ! I have “ not closed an eye all night, for how could I sleep and know you were ex-“ posed to danger? The dame Jacinthe “ too was here just after you left me, and told me such a tale of the robbers of “ Chateau Noir!”

<f Plague take the dame and her croak-Ci ing!” said Baptiste: “ had I not your prayers, and the prayers of iny little <f ones, my sweet Josephine ? that is the cc husband’s and the father’s shield: but see! I have brought thee a guest.”

ST. DOMINICK.

319

Josephine now first beheld the young and timid stranger ; who,, modestly retreating behind her kind host, contemplated in silent rapture the first scene of social and domestic felicity she had ever beheld. It was to Imogen a festival of feelings ; and the tear that glittered in her eye, the smile that dimpled her cheek, betrayed a heart formed to feel and to tnjoy that bliss it throbbed with delight only to observe.

Josephine, with blushing courtesy, welcomed her interesting guest : while the children, with playful surprise, touched the strings of her lute, then retreated ; then, lured back by the stranger’s supplicating smiles, hung on her dress, or sported in her arms. The grateful mother checked their familiarity with a look of tender reprehension ; while Imogen, delighted with their little freedoms, loaded them with caresses ; and, gay and innocent as themselves, displayed a playfulness infantine as their own.

320

THE NOVICE OF

NY h en Josephine had prepared their noontide repast, the little groupe circled round a table laid beneath the spreading branches of an elder on the banks of the stream Baptiste had boasted of, and spread with such coarse and simple fare as the unvitiated palate of nature, stimulated by a long unsatisfied appetite, only could relish. When it was concluded, grace was pronounced by the master of the simple feast with a devotional energy, which shewed it not the result of habitual ceremony, but Jhe pious etTusion of existing and grateful feelings. The young minstrel then tuned her lute, and repayed the hospitablo courtesies of her hosts with several popular ballads and tender vaudevilles many of them the impulsive effusion of genius, appropriate to the scene *

* La vaudeville appartient exclusivement aux Francois; et ils en ont de très piquantes, et de très plaisantes.—(Dictionnaire de Musique, par J. J. Rousseau.)

ST. DOMINICK.

32 i

of rural and domestic felicity the sons:-

J	O

stress then witnessed, and all calculated to harmonize with the simple taste of her auditors, and the native gaiety of the French heart. At last, at the request of her delighted hosts, she struck up a villa-nelle, the then prevailing rustic dance of the French peasant ; and Baptiste, unable to resist the magic influence of the sportive strain, sprung on his feet, and, with a boy in each hand, performed a spontaneous ballet, with a dextrous and spirited hilarity, that might almost compensate for the deficiency of grace and method with which it was executed ; while Josephine took her reel, gazed with pleased satisfaction at the performance, and sung at intervals a couplet adapted to the air.— Every pulse in the gay heart of Imogen throbbed in sweet vibration to the vivacious strain her flying fingers produced ; and when she cast round her eyes, and beheld the frugal remnants of the coarse* meal industry had provided for the neces-9

P

322

THE NOVICE OF

sities of nature, the clay-built hut, which scarcely excluded the penalties of Adam, <f the season’s changes,” and the ragged drapery of wretchedness, which scarcely veiled the weather-injured forms of laborious poverty, yet beheld in every countenance that surrounded her those beams of joy the heart only emanates, whose bright irradiation dispelled the pensive gloom adversity hangs upon the brow of its victim ; the glowing tints of pleasure flushing the cheek recent oppression had stained with a tear, and gaiety unrestrained animating those limbs to frolic exercise, which but a moment before bent beneath the hard-earned burthen labor had procured for the suppliance of indigence and distress.

Such is thy power, oh sweet affec-tion of the heart !” sighed Imogen: “ oppressed by tyranny, despoiled by the licentious rapine of warfare, driven to “ the last outline of misery, to herd with “ the beast of the field and bird of the

ST. DOMINICK.

323

“ air; still while the heart can turn and “ drown its sufferings in domestic joy—

while the endearments of social life lisp “ their soft comforts to the ear of thesuf-“ ferer, and every tie of tenderness and “ love, twined round the soul, administers “ an ameliorating charm to soothe its sor-c< rows—the arrow of adversity drops tc stingless, and despondency smiles away “ her woes on the bosom of domestic fe« “ licity !”

The thoughts of Imogen then reverted to the convent of St. Dominick ; she shuddered, and blessed the liberty she had regained, though every step of its progrès» sive attainment had been marked by the track of danger.

The children, now weary with their sportive play, threw themselves into their mother’s arms ; and Baptiste, taking up his hatchet, advised his young guest to take some repose, and wait till the sun declined before he recommenced his journey, went to work himself -, while Jose-

324

TIIE NOVICE OF

phine, gratefully thanking him for the amusement he had afforded her little family, spread with her own hands some dried leaves freshly gathered within their hut, on which Imogen flung herself with a sensation more grateful than she had ever felt before ; for she had taken no rest for the two preceding nights, and soon fell into a profound and tranquil sleep.

On the pillow of innocence the spirit of repose loves to prolong his balmy influence, and struggles with nature to protract his empire; and the eye which anxiety has sullied with a tear gladly closes the heavy lid, and shuts out the intrusive beam that wakes it to new care. The sun had already passed the meridional line, and faintly sketched the shadow of the hills on the plain below, when the children of Baptiste, thrumming on her lute, roused her from her leafy bed. Sweet had been the dream of her rest, for it was a dream of love; and the busy agency of

ST. DOMINICK.

325

imagination had lured her to the banks of the Durance, where fancy twined the flowery band with which affection wreathed the polished brow of the minstrel of Provence ; the dew which bathed its leaves was a tear of the soul, and the gale that perfumed them a sigh from the heart ; the visioned minstrel touched a shadowy lyre, and while the sound of passion floated on every dying note, the blue dissolving eye-beam of Imogen mingled with the minstrel’s burning glance.

The strain of love still faded on her ear, when she awoke and recognized the tones of her own lute. Her dream’s soft trance had diffused a delicious emotion through her whole frame; and while memory dwelt on the fanciful rapture, a tear hung upon the languishing smile which played round her lip, that it was indeed but fanciful, and haply never, never to be realized !

At the door of the hut, while the children fondled round her, she was met by

326

THE NOVICE OF

Josephine and Baptiste. They were both anxious she should remain with them that night ; but having learnt that the chateau de Rosemont was but four hours' walk from their hut, and hoping to reach it by sun-set,she gratefully declined their offer -, and having thanked them in all the warm effusions of a heart alive to every delicate minutia of the most refined gratitude, she promised they should hear shortly from her ; and that as soon as she should have obtained any interest with the lady of the castle, it should be exerted in their favor,, while she blushed to confess she could make them no other return for their kindness. For Imogen, despoiled of her little treasures by the arquebusier, possessed nothing but the picture of the chevalier enclosed in the letter of Pasiphae, and the small agate cross which had never left her bosom since the day she had been received at the convent of St. Dominick. Then, having embraced the children, and kissed the hand of Josephine with the well-af-

ST. DOMINICK,

327

fected gallantry of a young cavalier, she proceeded on her little journey, accompanied for about half a league by Baptiste, who, pointing to the forest of Folambray, desired her to take the path which wound round its skirts, and that from an eminence to the left of the road she would see the turrets of the chateau de Rosemont, which would guide her for the rest of her journey. He then shook her kindly by the hand, and, wishing that they might shortly meet again, left her to pursue her solitary journey.

The mind of Imogen had been as much cheered by the sweet visitant of her blissful dream, as her frame was refreshed and invigorated by repose. The sun rode high in the horizon, and spread the rich influence of his mellow tints on the land scape. The mountain breeze cooled the sultry glow of the hour, and gave spirit to health, strength to motion, and fragrance to the sense of the traveller ; who, supported by a long white staff presented to her by Bap-

328

THE NOVICE OF

tiste, and with her lute flung over her shoulder, lightly bounded on. Locomotion is ever favourable to the reflective powers ; air, exercise, and diversity of objects, awaken the pulse of thought to its liveliest throb ; and many a weary step is sweetly beguiled of its tedious length, by those blossoms the finger of fancy strews over it.

Imogen wandered on in that sweet inebriety of the feelings and the senses, which the freshness, the variety, and splendid beauty of every thing around her, contributed to awaken. Sometimes, as reflection led, she opposed the childless misery of the maniac mother, from whose bosom the horrors of fanaticism and party had torn every human comfort, to the domestic feficity of Baptiste’s charming family ; who, though sulfering from the same baleful cause, iiad still rescued from the rifling hand of .crue.L and licentious rapacity, those sweet blossoms of affection’s growth without which the heart is but a desert and desolate void. “ Alas!’* thought Imo-

ST. DOMINICK

329

gen, ff that the ingenuity of man, wan-“ toning in the variety and extent of its ff powers, should so frequently, and so “ successfully, exert its influence to per-‘f vert the best blessings of Providence ! " Was it for this the God of goodness gave us hearts to love, minds to feel, and <f sympathy to attract the tender affections “ of the soul to its kindred soul !” Then the gay caprice of imagination stole on the sober disquisition of the little moralist, and the soft recollection of her dream gave to her contemplation

“ The vision’d picture “ Of fancy, ’tranc’d in bliss.”

From these gay luxuriant dreams of a still enamoured heart, Imogen awoke to the recollection of the object of her journey ; and now first discovered that, lost in the indulgence of “ the idle visions of her brain,” she had wandered from the beaten track pointed out to her by Baptiste, and had left the eminence site should have as-

330

THE tfOVlCE OF

cended a considerable distance to the left : vexed at her inattention, and already something weary, she turned back, and, after a walk of near half an hour, found herself at the foot of the eminence, which, steep and rugged, she with some difficulty ascended. The sun was setting, and irradiated with its crimson beams the scene which expanded in gay luxuriancy beneath ; the extensive forest of Folambray spread to the north-west to a considerable distance; the summit of its lofty trees, tinged with gold, and waving to the evening breeze, appeared like the undulating waves of the ocean, receiving on their dark green heads the fading beams of the west; while the casements of the chateau, which arose on the left, were brilliantly illuminated with the reflection of the setting sun, that sunk in the horizon as Imogen descended the eminence, and struck into the path described by Baptiste as winding round the skirts of the forest, and leading to the chateau de Rosemont.

ST. DOMINICK.

331

The impatience of the weary traveller increased with every step, as the shadows lengthened on her path, and the sober drapery of evening hung its misty wreaths on every object: the dusky accompaniments of twilight already invested the lately glowing scene ; the lustre of nature was veiled, and the eye of the wanderer dwelt on the repose of her charms which breathed silence and solemnity. Although this was the hour that ever spoke a soft and impassioned language to her heart, yet that heart no longer acknowledged the sweet impression ; while her fears increased with every deepening shadow of darkness. Her step was no longer the loitering pace of pausing rapture or delusive thought, but rapid, almost to flight, and interrupted only by breathless fatigue : it was perhaps this singular rapidity which attracted the notice of a body of horsemen, who struck into the path she had taken, and with loud imprecation called on her to stop. Imogen, whose imaginary fears

THE NOVICE OF

were wound up to real terror, that banished all presence of mind, plunged into the forest,, instead of obviating suspicion by voluntarily exposing herself to the scrutiny of observation.

But Imogen, who fled, not from the hope that flight could ensure safety, but from the impulse of apprehension, soon found herself overtaken by two of the horsemen : on of them alighting seized her roughly by the shoulder, and, looking earnestly at her, exclaimed, Ventre St.

“ Gris ! a right dainty youth, a rare mu-" sician too, I warrant: but you seem a little weary, monsieur; I will therefore u spare you the trouble of another race,

“ and provide you with a more expedi-tious mode of travelling.” Then, raising the faint and unresisting Imogen in his arms, whom fear and amazement deprived of the power of speech, he placed her on x horseback behind his companion, a Spanish arquebusier; and strapping her on to the waist of his surly associate, who cast round

ST. DOMINICK.

333

a terrific glance, he mounted his horse, and they joined the rest of the party.

u Well, Guy,” exclaimed one of them, " what have you shot Hying ?”

fc A dainty nightingale,” said Guy, as they rode on, “ who would have found his way to our camp to delight our men with his minstrelsy ; like the other gen-<f tleman musician who slipt through our “ fingers at the siege of Rouenne, a i{ trusty spy, or I am no soldier.”

“ Nay, then/’ replied the other, “ he “ stands acquitted ; for if he is no more

“ a spy than thou art a soldier----”

"Why, how now, Armande?” said Guy : fc why dost thou ever come over " me thus with thy jests?”

‘f Mort de ma vie ! if it were as easy " to come over thee in jest, as to over-" come thee in earnest, monsieur bluster, " thou wouldest not be worth the break-ff ing a gibe on,” said Armande.

" Come, come, Armande,” cried another, a truce with your grape-shot wit ; and

334

THE NOVICE OF

ct let us have the story you told us, on the “ foraging-party last night, of the king “ who came, in the disguise of a minstrel, “ to the enemy’s camp : marry, it pleased fC me hugely !”

“ Perhaps,” said Armande, “ this young “ cavalier would rather hear the pleasant u and tragical ditty of the young man lt whom we hanged for a spy, during our “ campaign in Normandy.’*

“Hush! hush!” exclaimed Guy, “I “ hear the neighing of a steed, and sure I f' see a distant light; blessed rosary ! there “ goes a dreadful story of a ghost in ar-“ mour, mounted on a white steed, meet-“ ing one of our kings in this same forest,

“ and-----

“ To think how a man’s fears will run “ away with his wits !” said Armande ; “ truly, monsieur Guy, thou art a rare t( fellow, with thy ghost in armour, not to “ see that we are within a few paces of t% the vidette guard.”

Here they came up with the vidette.

ST. DOMINICK.

335

and haying stopped for a few moments to break some coarse jokes with their fellow-soldiers, who were going to their outposts for the night, they continued their route until the lights of the camp broke on the darkness of the night, and they arrived at the piquet guard.

“ Qui vive ?" demanded the sentinel. “ Vive la ligue !" replied the foremost;

advance and give the parole.” " Louise (i de Guise." The soldier then advanced, and whispered the counter-sign ; and the whole party were suffered to pass on to the camp, whose midnight stillness was only interrupted by the clanking of the armourers, the neighing of steeds, the frequent “ Qui vive?1' of the sentinels, and the faint burst of conviviality which proceeded from the tents of the officers, near which they passed.

Those scenes, so novel and so striking, would have interested the mind and pleased the picturesque fancy of Imogen, had she been a spectatress under any

336

THE NOVICE OF

other circumstances; but, wholly overcome by the situation in which she found herself, the danger to which, she was exposed, and the fatigue she had undergone, every faculty was blunted, and her mind acknowledged no sentiment, no emotion, but what terror and amazement awakened ; while, amidst the confusion of her ideas, she with difficulty learnt, by the conversation of her guards, that she was brought a prisoner to the rebel camp.

The party stopped before the tent where the first quarter-guard of the night was stationed. tf What hast thou got ei here ?” said the sentinel, who paraded before the tent. “ A swan,” said Bertrand, “ whose dying notes you may hear “ at the provot to-morrow, if you please. Who is the captain of the guard for the night?”

The count St. Dorval.s

“ It strikes me,” said Bertrand, in a low voice, we have picked up a prisoner of ‘"consequence; I will deliver him into

ST. DOMINICK.

331

et the count’s hands. My back still smarts <( for the escape of the young baron whom we picked up in the same way. Where “ is the count ?”

“ Within the tent, at supper with some <e few of his officers.”

Bertrand, who had the command of the party, alighted, and entered the tent. In; a few minutes he returned, ordered two of the soldiers to unbind the prisoner, and assist him to dismount. Guarded on either side, and preceded by Bertrand, the trembling Imogen was led, or rather dragged, into the guard-room; while round a table, well furnished with lights and wine, circled a group of officers, who all turned round to gaze at the prisoner, as, drooping disconsolately timid, she endeavoured to collect her thoughts, and enable herself to clear up the mystery of her appearance, without discovering more of her story than might lead to her liberation.

“ Where didst them pick up this young YQL. I.	Q

338

THE NOVICE OF

“musician, serjeant ?” demanded (lie youngest of the groupe.

“ On the skirts of the forest of Folam-“ bray, so please you, where it is said the “ king regaled himself* but yesterday €t with some of his officers. I thought “ this rpinstrel might have been of the “ party ; and as he seemed inclined to " take the road towards our camp, I did “ him the kindness to save him the trouble “ of walking, monsieur/'

“ A little more matter of fact, and less “jocularitysaid the commanding officer.

“ Nay* monseigneur," said Bertrand, u I have nothing more to relate ; we have “ not laid a hand on the prisoner, except 6< indeed to disencumber him of this in-

* Henry IV. during-the siege of Laon, went to dine in the forest of Folambray, where he had often been regaled, when a boy, with fruit and milk and new cheese, and in visiting which he promised himself great pleasure.

Mem. du Duc de Sully, ii. 3S1.

ST. DOMINICK,

33o

“ strument, and under favour must refer rf you to himself for further information/’ •

Such a variety of interrogation from every side followed this assertion, uttered by some with all the rudeness of inebriety, and by others with a spirit of savage raillery that sported wantonly with the feelings of its object, that Imogen, unable ta articulate, and overwhelmed by the influence of her strong and various emotions, involuntarily clung to the shoulder of one of her guards, and trembled with a violence that attracted the compassionate regards of the count St. Dorval. Rising from the head of the table, he advanced towards the prisoner ; and, having mildly checked the unmeaning curiosity of the young officers, he addressed her.

“ Whoe’er thou art,” said he, “ or “ wffiate’erthy intentions, young stranger,

<f the silence you seem obstinately to ob-“ serve, will avail thee nought; the laws “ of war are sacred, and you are doubtless

340

THE NOVICE OF

“ no stranger to the penalty annexed to ff their violation. Our cause has already “ suffered from the successful artifice of ce the enemy’s vigilant spies ; and though “ that delicate and trembling frame seems “ ill calculated for perilous adventure, it ct is evident that that disguise veils no “ common wearer.”

Nor shall it avail thee ought/’ said a young ensign, throwing off the hat which concealed her face, and confined a profusion of long tresses, that now fell luxuriantly round a neck whose dazzling whiteness was no longer veiled; for another, more inhumanly daring than the first, rudely tore open the collar of her robe, in attempting to drag her forward to the light, and the ruff which shaded her neck fell with it. It was at that moment the woman’s delicacy surmounted the woman’s weakness: Imogen cast round an eager look, that seemed to demand a glance of sympathy, of protection. The eye of the

ST. DOMINICK.

311

count de St. Dorval only answered it and the trembling prisoner, with a sudden; effort of strength, sprang from her guard’s rude grasp, and fell at the feet of one in whose venerable countenance shone the protecting benignity of heaven itself. “ Save me,” exclaimed Imogen, " and—” what she would have added died on her trembling lip, but the uplifted and supplicating eye of distress wept tears that spoke.

A moment of general amazement and consternation ensued ; ail crowded round the prostrate prisoner, and every eye beamed admiration and surprise—admiration at lier charms, surprise that she was still prostrate:	for,	while, with hands

folded on her throbbing bosom, she knelt faint and speechless at the feet of the protector the intuition of sympathy had elected, the count de St. Dorval hung over her in silence: his arms, outstretched to receive the suppliant, were stiffened in.

q a

THE NOVICE OF

the altitude of wonder, surpassing the transitory emotions of common-place surprise ; the eye that shed a mild compassion on the fugitive, suddenly changed its expression to the ardent gaze, whose thrilling glances beamed with soul, and swam in tears ; and a faint ejaculation escaped the quivering lip that would have uttered the accents of beneficence and encouragement. Then, with a long-drawn sigh, he seemed to shake off the strong influence of emotion, and, bending over Imogen, raised her tenderly in his arms; and, placing heron a chair, held with a trembling hand a glass of water to her lips.

More revived by the affectionate though silent benevolence of his manner than the refreshing beverage he administered, Imogen looked gratefully and expressively in his face; and, replying to the eloquence of that look, he said : Cheer thee, cheer thee, sweet lady !—

ST. DOMINICK.

343

te Whatever may have been the motive “ which led thee to adopt this disguise, “ and to incur the perils of adventure, in “ times themselves so perilous, thou hast ce nothing now to fear from the indignant <c insults of unfeeling ignorance, invested “ with temporary power to bear down “ upon the unfortunate : "tis the count St.

Dorval, who pledges himself to be true tf to the voluntary confidence you have “ honored him with."’

Well said, count !” exclaimed one of the officers, unreproved at his commander’s oblique reproach.

<c Ventre Dieu, monseigneur, you are <f a fortunate man!” added another; and I would rather be invested with such a “ command, than be made generalissimo ef to the whole army.”

*f Gentlemen,” said the count firmly, “ these are idle insinuations. To the f‘ commander-in-chief 1 stand accountable ft for the prisoner—to God and my own

THE NOVICE OF

“ conscience for her safety in the most “ unlimited sense. What right we have ct to detain her must be a matter of future

investigation ; but while that detention “ exists, the gallantry of knighthood for-“ bids we should not all consider ourselves tf as bound to render her every succour. “ Come, lady, suffer me to conduct you “ to my tent, where you can repose at <f least in safety.”

The count, with an air of paternal freedom,, drew the arm of the still-bewildered Imogen through his own ; and, while the officers drew back abashed, led her to his tent, which lay but a few paces from that of the quarter-guard. It was a spacious and elegant pavilion, and divided into three apartments; in the first of which the count’s squire and page were playing at chess ; to the last the count, followed by a page with lights, conducted his guest.

“ This apartment/’ said the count, with

$T. DOMINICK.

345

a faint smile, “is to be your prison for <( to-night. I myself will be at once “ your servant and your guard. Mean-“ while reckon on the exertions of a “ friend in your favor, who trusts he will “ not prove himself unworthy of your “ election. With enemies who wear such tc looks as thine we wage no war; and iC whatever motive may have lured thee i( to the dangerous precincts of a camp, “ that protection thy youth and sex de-“ mands shall attend thee hence and €t guard thee here.” The count then, without waiting to receive the acknowledgments which hovered on the lips of Imogen, recommended to her to take that repose her evident weariness demanded, and retired.

The count had left the apartment but a few minutes, and Imogen was indulging the copious flow of those sweet tears which stream from the heart in the moment of safety received from the grasp of

THE NOVICE OF

peril—of gratitude awakening to the touch of unexpected benevolence, when a page entered the apartment with those necessary refreshments her exhausted nature required. Having swallowed some bread and wine, she dismissed the attendant, and her full heart made its offering to heaven for the comparative safety she enjoyed ; and all its grateful emotions pointed towards the friend it had raised for her in the hour of danger and distress. If the benevolent though melancholy expression of St. Dorval’s countenance, his venerable and interesting aspect, had won her confidence in the first moment that her eye had met his, every word he uttered, every glance he emanated, and even the soft sadness that hung upon his faint smile, confirmed the intuitive dictates of her sympathy; and she scarcely regretted the perilous adventure which had made her known to one, in whose looks of benignity and sweetness her hopes faintly traced fu> ture acts of kindness and friendship.

ST. DOMIXICK.	817

From the character of a spy, a supposition which excited a smile to his cool and unbiassed apprehension, she could easily vindicate herself; and to his protecting kindness she should at last owe her safe arrival at the chateau de Rosemont.— The sanguine expectations of unpractised youth receive with eager susceptibility the warm impression of its wishes; the faintest beam of sympathy is adequate to illume the fading lamp of hope; and fancy darts athwart those probable obstacles prudence shrinks from encountering.

At last, overcome by the bodily and mental fatigue she had endured, Imogen deposited on the table the packet she had so successfully concealed in her bosom; and without divesting herself of an article of her dress, threw herself on a couch that filled a corner of the apartment. A deep sleep soon stole on the perturbation of her senses ; it was the profound repose of innocence long torn from its “ calm mood”

348

THE NOVICE, &C.

by anxiety and fatigue; and the dream of her rest still gave to her imagination the image of him to whose benevolence and compassion she owed its enjoyment.

CHAP. XII.

One part, one little part, we dimly scan Thro' tbe dark medium of life’s feverish dream,

Yet dare arraign the whole stupendous plan.

If but that little part incongruous see;n ;

Nor is that part perhaps what mortals deem.

Oft from apparent ill our blessings rise:

Oh ! then renounce that impious self-esteem,

That aims to trace the secrets of the skies ;

For thou art but of dust—be humble, aud be wise.

Minstrel, B. I.

Recordivi che’l primo dolce peso

Fui de le vostrebraccia e prima io n’hebbe

I cari baci e vi gli diede spesso.

Jphigenia.—Doz.CE.

IT was the trumpet’s warlike blast, the martial clang of arms, the deep-toned, word of command, echoing from rank to rank, that roused Imogen from the sweets of obliviating repose. She started from her pillow ; recollection slowly returned, and the events of the preceding night, the circumstance of her present situation, float-

4

THE NOVICE OF

ed “ like half-forgotten dreams” in her mind.

While she was still engaged in disentangling her ideas from the confusion in which they were involved, a woman entered the apartment. She introduced herself as the wife of a soldier, whom the count had sent to offer her services. The form of a female was a grateful object to the eyes of Imogen ; and, while the woman officiously assisted at her simple toilet, Imogen thankfully accepted her services. This military female was in every sense of the word a Frenchwoman, free, communicative, and unreserved, and not a little curious as to the disguise of the fair prisoner ; to whom she related a long story of a lady who had got into the camp in a soldier’s dress to see her knight the evening before the battle of Ivri. Imogen, laughingly, assured her that that had not been the object of her disguise ; and, pleased w'ith her garrulity, chatted to her with that fascinating condescension w hich ever wins on the heart of humble inferiority.

ST. DOMINICK.

5

As soon as she had finished the very-necessary and refreshing duties of the toilet,, her attendant retired, and in a few minutes a page entered to inform her the count waited breakfast for her in the outward apartment. Thither Imogen followed him. The count was leaning pensively over the back of a chair, on which his helmet and sword were laid. A few grey locks, no longer confined by the pressure of the weighty casque, played on a forehead more strongly marked with the traces of care than the furrows of age ; and in his countenance was that mingled expression of benevolence and melancholy which evinced that lie had learnt to appreciate the sufferings of others by his own, and that the beneficent impulses of his heart were confirmed by the suggestion of his own internal feelings.

When Imogen entered, he startecl and gazed on her with little less emotion than he had done the preceding night; till, observing the modest confusion with

THE NOVICE OF

-which her eyes avoided his, lie approached, and, taking* her hand with paternal familiarity, enquired how she had passed the night, with more solicitude than ceremony ; then, having dismissed the page, drew a chair for her, and seated himself beside her with the easy freedom of an old acquaintance. Imogen already forgot that he in fact was not so. While the count pressed her to partake of a camp’s homely fare, Imogen attempted to express the emotions of gratitude his kindness had awakened ; but her’s was not a heart to cherish feelings capable of expression, and the sigh that died on her lip, the tear that swam in her eye, was the only eloquence that nature gave them.

And why these tears ?” said the count, taking her hand : fC- flow they from the “ recollection of sufferings sustained, or tf from an apprehension of dangers yet to a come? Has the spirit of enthusiasm f‘ which characterizes these times betrayed “ thee into an adventure beyond thy

ST. DOMINICK.

7

i( powers to encounter ? or has a softer “ cause than that of party spirit or fan-“ cied loyalty led thee to adopt this dis-“ guise, and brave the vigilance of our “ guards ?”

“ No, my lord,” said Imogen, these “ are not tears of apprehension or regret, " but such os the full heart sends to the c< eye when words fail to express its fcel-“ ings : had you been less kind, they had ct flowed perhaps, but not from so sweet a y cause.”

The count seemed still to hang upon the sound of her voice for some minutes after it had ceased to vibrate ; then he emphatically exclaimed: “That sweet voice of “ thine, fair mysterious stranger, breathes f‘ no unknown accent on my ear ; it speaks “ peace to my heart ; it revires each dor-ee mant power of joyous emotion, and “ sheds upon my retreating life the faint te reflection of that sun which beamed “ upon its dawn. Speak ! who and what “ art thou, that comctli thus endued with

s

T4IE NOVICE OF

'f magic spell to wake the dead to life, and pour a flood of transient joy upon C( a heart whose every spring of happiness has long since been exhausted ?” Then, observing (he effect his singular emotion had produced in the astonished countenance of his guest, he added faintly, “ But <f forgive me, lady ; my feelings are my masters : even at this age they lead me “ where they will; and your strong re-“ semblance of a person who-is no more--might well rouse them to their wildest “ excess of tyranny ! But when I request “ some account of my fair prisoner, it is f< to save her that publicity of detail I am “ sure she would shrink from encounter-c< ing; for the report of a female spy of some rank having been taken prisoner1 “ last night has already circulated through the camp/’

There was an inexpressible something in the air, the looks, and voice, of the count de St. Dorval that would have won unlimited confidence from the narrow

«#

ST. DOMINICK.	9

heart of distrust itself; and the all con fiel ing sanguine character of Imogen dilated to the sympathetic influence of her illustrious host’s candid and ingenuous manners. With brief simplicity she related her little story, slightly touching on her aversion to the life to which she had been devoted ; and relating those adventures which had marked her flight from the chateau de Montmorell, and preceded her having been taken a prisoner, with undeviating accuracy. She then presented the packet, addressed to the lady de Rosemont, to whom she was recommended, in proof of the veracity of her detail.

The interest which the count took in her simple narration betrayed itself in his countenance; and amazement stole on the admiration of his gaze as she pronounced the name of de Rosemont, and presented him the packet.

“ Madame de Rosemont !" he repeated ; <f and who recommended thee, sweet fu-gitive, to her protection ?” a 2

THE NOVICE OF

The minor canoness of St. Dominick, “ my lord.’*

re The minor canoness of St. Domi-“ nick ! Merciful God! and knew you ce the canoness ? and were you at the “ convent of St. Dominick ?”

“ The minor canoness of St. Domi-“ nick/' said Imogen, wiping away a tear, “ was my only friend; and recol-“ lection goes not so far back as to my “ entrance at the convent of St. Domi-<f nick/’

Who were thy parents?” demanded the count eagerly.

I never knew them,” replied Imogen feelingly. <f Deserted by them in my in-fancy, I was received at the wheel of “ St. Dominick, and reared on the chari-(able institution of the order/'

“ And was there no article of dress, no £C circumstance that could lead to the dis-“ covery of your friends?” asked the count, in a voice scarcely articulate. ff None,” said Imogen, infected with

ST. DOMINICK.

11

his emotion : €t a coarse veil was wrapt r£ round my infant form ; and this cross, “ which was suspended round my neck, bore no mark but the initials of the saint to whom I was devoted, and on the reverse the name of Imogen, by which name the abbess had me baptized.” tc Shew me that cross/’ said the count faintly. Imogen loosened it from her neck, and presented it with a hand almost as trembling as that which was eagerly stretched out to receive it. The count gazed on it till his glazed eye dropt tears ; then, almost breathless with agitation, he inarticulately exclaimed: “ Lady, eigh-teen years ago this cross was fastened round the neck of my only child. Mer-“ ciful Heaven, mock not my hopes I-— “ Yet, oh my heart! lie still ! That child bore on her cheek and just beneath her “ left temple a singular mark; it was in-“ delible, not the effect of accident, but “ born with her.”

"Was it — such —as this?” faintly.

THE NOVICE OF

trembling!y, exclaimed Imogen, falling instinctively at the count’s feet, and raising those luxuriant tresses which shaded her temple :	was it such as this ?”

Agitated almost to dissolution, panting, breathless, the count’s eyes rolled in silence on the mark, then were raised to heaven with an expression of hope, gratitude, and ecstacy; while with a sigh that seemed to rend his heart he faintly exclaimed, “ God of omnipotence ! my C( child !” and, stretching forward to receive her in his arms, fell lifeless on the earth.

Imogen sank on the bosom of her newfound father; and the shriek that escaped her lips brought the squire and page into the apartment.

Amazed at the scene which presented itself, and suspecting that the disguised prisoner was the cause of the situation in which they found their apparently lifeless lord, instead of giving him the assistance he required, they rudely seized the pros-

ST. DOMINICK.

13

trate Imogen., who, clinging to the count, faintly exclaimed, My father! O my iC father !" The tone of her voice reached the faintly throbbing heart of the count, and stole with renovating influence on his senses. Imogen raised his drooping head on her bosom ; and, bathing his hands with her tears, softly demanded, Am I <r indeed thy child?” The count clasped her hands in his, fixed his ardent gaze on her face, and, while his looks of melting tenderness lingered on every feature, and dwelt with tender curiosity and amazement on every lineament, he faintly exclaimed, fC JNIy child! my long-lost child !” then with a deep-drawn sigh caught her to his breast, and wept over her in silence ; while Imogen, as if lost in sweet illusions of a delightful dream, from which she dreaded to awake, mingled her tears with his.

Meantime the domestics gazed on the affecting scene in an amazement which for some minutes deprived them of the power

THE NOVICE OF

oftmotion or of speech. The squire, who had been for twenty years the humble companion of the count St. Dorval, looked earnestly at Imogen, and, in a tone of recognition, exclaimed, Holy Mother ! sure “ it is the countess herself!” while the count, who was now seated on a couch, pointed to Imogen, and, addressing the squire, in an alfecting tone exclaimed* “ Richambaut, hast thou ne’er seen a form “ and face like that ?”

<f Not, my lord,” said the squire, “ since (t I beheld the countess de St. Dorval.5*

“ Behold her daughter !” said the count, with an air of mingled exultation and de-light.

Richambaut fell at Imogen's feet, and respectfully kissed the trembling hand extended to raise him.

Since I have lived to see this day,’5 said the old man with tears, f<r I have lived long enough.” Then, with a delicacy that intimated no common mind, he withdrew with the page, checking the ardent

ST. DOMINICK.

15

curiosity of his affectionate solicitude till the first flush of emotion had subsided in the bosom of his lord, of whose sufferings he had long been the witness, of whose transports he could well judge.

While Imogen, confused, bewildered, transported, hung on the shoulder of lier father, the count, still gazing on her, seemed as if every sense was absorbed in the contemplation of her face and figure; then drawing her towards him, he energetically exclaimed :	Oh	!	I could not

“ be deceived ! thy first glance sank to ‘* my soul, and rekindled the sacred flame nature illumined in my heart, when in thy sainted mother’s circling arms Ï first beheld thee, smiling like a seraph on “ her nurturing bosom ! Thy first accents “ spoke to my heart in thy mother’s well-€€ remembered tones, and its ardent palpi-f' tation acknowledged thee her child, " her Jong-lost long-lamented child 1”— Then dropping on one knee, and raising the clasped hands of Imogen in his, he

THE NOVICE OF

exclaimed in a tone awful, affecting, and impressive : “ Eternal Disposer of the <f universe ! receive the grateful offerings fc of two hearts, who, by the fatherly in-“ terposition of thy providential 'care, are “ restored to happiness and to each “ other !” And while words of pious gratitude murmured on his quivering lips, he embraced his kneeling child, raised her in his arms, and implored a blessing on her head.

The benediction of a father for the first time breathed on the ear and sank to the heart of Imogen : she felt it was a fathei' pronounced it, and felt she was his child. The various and powerful feelings of her agitated heart seemed to have reached their climax of emotion : she fixed her eyes on the count’s face till they were glazed with tears—a convulsive laugh of ecstacy burst from her lips : ff Then I <f have a father !” she wildly exclaimed, and sank motionless, though not insensible, on his shoulder.

ST. DOMINICK.

17

" You have, you have!” exclaimed the count, pressing her to his heart, while a warm tear fell on her cheek : that tear was the sweet cordial administered by nature, and the fading senses of Imogen revived to its influence. *

“ I have a father \* she rcpeatrd in a tone of firmness softened by delight;

(t and that precious tear is my assurance/ The hour which succeeded to those eventful, those precious moments already x elapsed was occupied in the indulgence of those poignant feelings description fails to reach, and the strongest powers of imagination but faintly conceive. Imogen, the long-deserted, alienated, friendless, Imogen, whose heart had hitherto so long cherished those sweet and glowing affections, those tender and refined sensibilities, it was so eminently organized to feel, yet cherished them in vain j and who, rich in all those sensations that constitute the summit of human felicity, had hitherto lived isolated from their enjoyment, and.

18

TUE NOVICE OF

amidst the social blisses of creation, still wandered

“ A solitary fly,

“ Without a horde of sweets,”—

now for the first time met a father’s tender gaze* and heard herself claimed by the endearing title of child ; while the ardent feelings of the count (in whose bosom the lyprm aifections still reared their unfaded heads, as though the chill breath of age had not sighed upon their freshness,) revelled in the transporting conviction of having found a long-lamented and only child, the fair and blooming transcript of the idol of his youthful adoration, of the saint of his maturer homage—a saint to whom his heart had erected a shrine where affliction still offered hourly tributes of tenderness and regret.

To the tide of emotion which at first overwhelmed the souls of the father and child succeeded that ardent and mutual curiosity so natural to their situation.—

ST. DOMINICK.

19

Imogen, though flurried beyond the power of perspicuous detail, briefly ran over the particulars of her life since consciousness first awakened in her mind amidst the dreary cloisters of St. Dominick. Her relation was indeed little more than a history of her sensations or ideas ; for till within the last six months her life had been monotonous and unvaried, equally barren of incident and destitute of event. That part of it where her heart was most interested was the most eloquently touched on ; and when she spoke of her connection with the canoness, the virtues, the talents, the generosity, of her friend, the spirit of friendship seemed to breathe inspiration on her detail, and gratitude shed her glowing tints on each trait of excellence memory delighted to reveal. The characters of the lady Magdelaine and the friar were sportively sketched off, with all those powers of comic delineation which betrayed the disposition of their possessor as not wholly inimical to “ Every scene of ridicule in things,”

20

THE NOVICE OF

when the playfulness of the happiest temperament was not clouded by the shadowy influence of care, distracted by the throes ofsuspence and anxiety; and her account of her situation at the chateau, and the authorship of her learned patroness, drew a smile to the lips of the count, whose pensive brow gradually resigned its compression to the influence of her cheering vivacity ; while the eager attention with which he hung on her detail seemed touched with new interest as she dwelt on the character and friendship of the minor canoness of St. Dominick.

When she had concluded her interesting relation, over which she had shed those illuminations of mind the light of genius only emanates, and which the count, under the grateful consciousness of paternal pride, had delightfully noticed, he tenderly embraced her, and uttered a prayer of thankfulness to heaven, that, in recovering a child, he had found her endued with that strength and cultivation of

ST. DOMINICK.

21

mind which is ever the best testimony of the virtues of the heart.

While on the bewitching graces which accompanied these invaluable possessions he was silent, but not unobserving, after a pause of some length the count said : “ I f must now, my beloved child, leave you “ for a short time. You have been brought ff a prisoner to this camp, and as such I <f stand accountable for you to our com-ff mander-in-chief. The young duke de Guise has lately joined his uncle, the “ duke de Mayenne: they are both my <f friends, and I have the honour to be collaterally connected with the duke by fr his mother’s side, whose virtues and ta-ci lents are the admiration of the world.

I well know how deeply my illustrious friends will participate in my rapture, when I acquaint them that in my pri-“ soner I have found my long-lost daughter : but lest the instinct of nature “ should but faintly corroborate the inco-" herent claim I have made to thee as

21

THE NOVICE OF

“ such, take this key. On the table near “ the couch where you reposed last night, “ you will behold a small casket : it con-<c tains some papers relative to my life and “ thy birth. When amidst the gloom of “ midnight I have left my restless pillow, “ and soothed my sorrows by retracing <c them (sure beyond the sad indulgence “ of my own melancholy feelings) some “ sweet and secret intuition urged me to “ the mournful task, and my heart’s faint “ hopes suggested that the tear of filial ct tenderness should bathe those woes pa-“ ternal anguish had recorded.”

CHAP. XIII.

Here much to do with hate, but more with love.

Shakspeare. Ma del tiu de la madre em pia fortuua Pargoletto develse.

Sonetto de Torquatt© Tasso.

AS soon as the count had retired, Imogen, all eagerness, all hope, all emotion, flew to the casquet. The first object that

ST. DOMINICK.

23

presented itself to her eye was the miniature of a beautiful female, whose strong resemblance to herself left no doubt that it was the picture of her mother; and the kiss her warm lip stamped on it was bathed with tears of tenderness and regret. On the back of the gold which encased it was written, “ Julia de Ribemont, countess “ de St. Dorval.” “ Then I am indeed ff the daughter of the count and countess “ de St. Dorval !” was the silent ejaculation of the tender but not unambitious heart of Imogen. She then took out a roll of manuscript, and eagerly began the perusal of the following

MEMOIRS.

Among the ancient nobility of Provence the barons de Montargis and the counts de St. Dorval held no subordinate rank. Equally high in the scale of dignity, power, and opulence, their equality produced those germs of competitorship which many

?A

TI1E NOVICE OF

unavoidable and many adventitious circumstances contributed to mature. Whether embroiled in domestic feuds or foreign contentions; whether in the slumber of warfare, or the intervals of peace, they entered the ring, or jousted at the tournament; or vvhetheramidst the social enjoyments of the public banquet or the privacy of retired life: still the powers of dissension, of hereditary hatred, opposed them to each other on the list of inveterate and irreconcileable enmity.

The Durance, whose blue waves bathed the rocky base of the chateau Montar-gis, reflected from the opposite shore the lofty turrets of St. Dorval. Ages had rolled over the time-proof edifices of anti* quity ; and still they frown on each other in all the gloomy pride of rivalship, and still do they give to the eye of the beholder no faint emblem of that domestic animosity which has so long existed, and still subsists, between their respective families. The family de Montargis embraced the he-

ST. DOMINICK.

25

resies of Luther in the reign of Henry the Second.* The counts de St. Dorval, at the same period, were active in their endeavours to check the innovation the schismatic spirit of the age was gradually introducing into the immutable system of their ancestors’ holy faith. In a later day the barons de Montargis united with Catherine de Medicis, and afterwards with Henry of Navarre, in suppressing the

League and crushing the house of Lores	O

raine : the counts de St. Dorval in promoting the measures of the League and supporting the duke of Guise.f Thus religious distinction and political faction seemed united in their endeavours to sharpen the asperity of family feuds ; but it remained for that passion, which should be

* Henry the Second executed the edicts against the Hu-gonots with the titmost severity. He erected a chamber of prosecution, composed of members of the parliament ; and at the coronation of his queen Catherine de Medicis was present at an auto de fi of obstinate Hugonots, which contributed, among the nuptial festivities, to the amusement of the court, t Head of the princes of Lorraine.

VOL. II.	B

26

THE NOVICE OF

the great solvent of every rancorous sentiment, to hurl the arrow of defiance at every hope of reconcilement; and love completed that structure of discord, of which hereditary religious and political hatred had laid the foundation. Twenty years have elapsed since the present baron de Montargis and count de St. Dorval were in the prime of life. They were the only sons of two tender but ambitious fathers, who had not yet paid the debt of nature, and who instilled into the minds of their children those principles of dis-sention which had from infancy rankled in their own. The younger de Montargis was of a cold, phlegmatic, and gloomy, character: the ambitiomof a great alliance had forced him into an early marriage, and he became a father and a widower in the very spring of life. On the death of his first lady, love suggested a second union; and Julia de Ribemont, a rich protestant heiress, and the ward of his father, became his betrothed bride by the dying wishes of

ST. DOMINICK.

27

bcr parent. The lady de Ilibemont was conducted to the chateau de Montants previous to the celebration of their nuptials, and the two de Montargis’s were only prevented from accompanying- her by the political distraction which at that period agitated Paris.

Meantime the younger St. Dorval, adverse to the political intrigues in which his father was engaged at the metropolis, of a delicate constitution, and of a romantic and studious turn, wooed peace and the muses amidst the embowering shades of Provence; where every grove wras sacred to the presiding deities of love and song, and breathed the spirit of the tutelar being to which they were consecrated. It was at this period a circumstance took place which produced the following letters.

Letter the first.

M. de St. Dorval to the Lady Julia de Ribemont.

Suffer me, madam, to reject those elegant acknowledgments, as dangerous as

28

THE NOVICE OP

they are unmerited. The spirit of benevolence irradiates your countenance, yet you talk of a common-place act of humanity in a light a being of an inferior species only should consider it. If your looks, your air, your eyes, are truly illustrative of your mind, your sentiments should rise in the scale of refinement, even beyond the conception of ordinary characters. Review, madam, the little incident once more which gave birth to your polite note of this morning; and, as the first indiscrimina-ting flush of gratitude subsides, it will doubtless appear to you in a different point of view. Alone and solitary, I was rambling along the delicious shores of the Durance, when, from the beautiful harbour which fronts the portico of the chateau de Montar gis, I beheld your little bark put off : my eye pursued its picturesque course ; while its snowy sails unfurled to the breeze, its streamers glittering through the foliage of the intervening groves, it glided proudly o’er the wave, as

ST. DOMINICK.

29

if conscious of the precious treasure it enshrined. The river’s devious course had scarcely stolen it from my gaze, when suddenly the sultry air glowed with insupportable ardour; dark red clouds hovered in the atmosphere, emitting from their massy points coruscations of flame, or bearing on their gloomy surface the lightning’s vivid flash. The distant thunder rolled its profound echoes amidst the deep cavities of the surrounding rocks, and the presiding spirit of the storms seemed to brood its furies on the late glossy bosom of the Durance : its waves swelled, became agitated, rose to the elevation of mountains, or sank to the dark chasm of an abyss. Guided only by two youthful rowers, I beheld your boat vainly struggling with the rapidly-increasing horrors of the storm ; and, amidst the wind’s shrill squall, the faint cries of female distress met my ear. Accompanied by a few of my domestics, well skilled in the navigation of the river, I ventured into a light

so

THE NOVICE OF

pleasure-boat, and bad the good fortune to save yours, and conduct you in safety to shore. Eager only for your preservation, I did not consider whether it was to the chateau de Montargis, or the chateau de St. Dorval 1 carried you. Chance directed it should be the latter; and to be candid, I trembled lest your silence and reserve should have been the effect of your having already inhaled that pernicious vapour the air of Montargis respires, and which seems to poison every mind it taints against the family of St. Dorval : but haply the evident depression of your spirits proceeded from the fatigue and apprehension you had sustained; and, to confess the truth, 1 am selfish enough to wish it did ; for your condescension in suffering me to attend you and your companion home looked not like the effects of family prejudice; yet in you, who are so soon to become a lovely member of that family, such a prejudice might not be wholly unwarrantable. We are apt not only to excuse

ST. DOMINICK.

31

but adopt the errors of those we love ; for love is a sophist,, who preaches not to the reason, but the heart; and all its weaknesses and all its passions are but too favourable to the subtlety of his arguments. How little the heart can answer for itself this letter betrays : I meant to have written a few lines, and have given you a volume : 1 will, however, only add, that at the moment your too grateful and too flattering billet of this morning was put into my hands, 1 was on the point of making my personal enquiries for your health at the chateau de Montargis. 1 would not swear, madam, that you come not under the penal laws of Charlemagne on the score of sorcery; and that the sudden storm, with all its relative circumstances, was but the illusion of enchantment: for certainly nothing less than a magic spell could lure a son of the count de St. Dorval to the portals of the baron de Montargis. I struggle not against supernatural agency, I bow to the omnipotence of my beautiful en-

32

THE NOVICE OF

chantress, and only await her command to pay those respects in person,, with which J am the most humble and devoted of her servants.

St. Dorval.

Billet.

From M. de St. Dorval to the Lady Julia de Ribemont.

You are right, madam ; the soul is of no sect/no party: it is, as you say, our passions and our prejudices, which give rise to our religious and political distinctions. You add, you have already dropt a tear to the dissensions which have so long divided the families of Montargis and de St. Dorval: it is thus that angels deplore the self-created miseries of man ; although exempt by the divinity of their nature from a sympathy of feeling. May thy sensible heart never feel a woe, but what its compassion for the sufferings of others awakens ! Circumstances prevent your receiving me this morning, but to-morrow—

ST. DOMINICK

S3

Why cannot time be annihilated till to-morrow?—Till to-morrow, (what magical letters compose that little word !) and ever, I feel I am destined to be the most devoted of your servants.

St. Dorval.

Billet.

And have I spent some hours in the chateau de Montargis ; and are they to be the happiest of my existence? Certainly they are, if you persist in your cruel resolve !

Not suffer me to see you again ! Gracious heaven ! why then suffer me to visit you at all ? Why permit me to listen to those accents which penetrate the soul ; those sentiments which vibrate in unison with all its most refined emotions ; those lips so bashfully wise ; those eyes so eloquent in silence,? Am I then destined never again to listen to the voice of the charmer, ' charm she ever so wisely/ or acknowledge the fugitive and syren graces b 2

THE NOVICE OF

with which nature has adorned her more inestimable gifts ? Perhaps, at this moment, the infant Montargis (happy urchin!) sports in your arms, and pleads with cherub smiles the cause of his absent father. Yet, though ’tis true the boy is Love's loveliest emblem ! yet, O fair Julia, construe one smile as the cold intercession in the favour of friendship : yes ! let the infant boy of Montargis plead for St. Dorval; and St. Dorval will forget he is the son of the man it is his inheritance to hate ; he will consider him only as the child of Julia’s future adoption ; as the child of Julia’s future husband. What a politician, even in love, is this Montargis, when in his absence he consigns his fascinating cherub to your care ? With the perfections of this lovely infant ever before your eyes, will they not, by a natural association, lead your thoughts towards the father ? happy, too happy de Montargis !

St. Dorval.

ST. DOMINICK.

35

Billet.

A thousand blessings light on the seraph head of your young companion ! You say he was playing in your arms when my supplicating note reached you, and that his smiles and caresses seemed intuitively to second my intreaties. 1 am all gratitude for your condescending acquiescence, even though obtained by the involuntary influence of the child of Montargis. Adieu ! I shall wish away the hours till this evening.

St. Dorval,

Letter.

A few days are scarcely elasped since a note from Julia would have communicated in its touch a thrill of rapture through my whole frame; yet with the intuitive apprehensions of love, I shuddered when I received your letter of this morning. Although the gravity and reserve with which 1 have been lately received might have taught me to expect it, I hesitated to break

26

THE NOVICE OF

the seal ; and the blood which glowed in my veins as I kissed the lines so lately traced by you, froze with icy coldness round my heart as I perused them. You say you weep a.s you indite, and confess I taught those tears to flow : you deplore your fatal indulgence to my wishes, yet blame me as the efficient cause of your imprudence. Oh Julia ! you arc the nr-bitress of your own destiny, and your misery or happiness depends solely on yourself. Awaken then from the slumber of the mind into which the timidity of your nature has lulled you. Kemember that you are imprudent only according to the circumstances which may govern your future life; that the father which promised your hand held no power over your heart; that to bestow that hand when the affections are withheld will not be prudent but criminal ; that though by a parent’s will the forfeiture of your rich possessions follows the breach of that contract your heart never subscribed to, you arc still left mis-

SX. DOMLNICK.

37

tress of your person and your actions. O Julia, I have! now but one other argument to suggest, and then 1 shall be silent for ever !

The son, the only son, of the count de St. Dorval, heir to an hereditary hatred to the house of Montargis, and stimulated by many personal aggravations to nourish that aversion, imbibed almost with maternal nurture, has sacrificed his justly-founded haired, personal dislike, political and religious sentiments, his resentment, his prudence, and his pride, at the feet of Julia de Ribemont : all, all have vanished to the glance of her eye, to the sound of her voice, and St. Dorval, the once proud and haughty St. Dorval, has meanly and clandestinely stolen through the forbidden por ta Is of Montargis, which for ages have been barred against his family, which still but for their master's absence would have been closed against himself, only to catch one smile from the lip of Julia, one glance of soft encouragement from her eye ! Such,

38

THE NOVICE OF

O Love, is thy omnipotence ! But why delineate to Julia the feelings of a heart whose every vibration she is already mistress of? It is true I have hitherto been silent, and Julia has been—O heavens! her infatuated modesty, her timid reserve, her refined and elevated delicacy, even when caution closed the eye, and when prudence slumbered, breathed the vestal soul of sublime and immaculate purity itself; and even if the remembrance of her beauty’s transient flower, her lively wit’s bewitching blandishment, her youthful form’s fresh fascinating graces, shall fade in the lapse of time, those sweet attributes of feminine perfection shall live in my heart’s fond recollection till that heart shall cease to be Julia's, shall cease to throb with life ! Yes, Julia, in spite of your silence and reserve, you know you are beloved ; and oh ! if my heart has not deceitfully construed in my favour those sweet compliances I have read in thy full blue eyes, those sudden blushes that warm-

ST. DOMINICK.

39

ed thy cheek at my appearance, that touching pensive air which softly ushered in my loitering departure, Julia’s heart beats with no languid pulse for St. Dorval. The emotions which pursue this (perhaps chimerical but blissful) conviction baffle description ; they overpower, they overwhelm me. I will not, dare not, add another line, save that in which I entreat you will suffer me to see you an hour before sunset this evening on the west rampart of Montargis. O Julia, Julia! you will not, must not refuse this last request of him who only holds his existence from your hands.

St. Dorval.

Letter.

31. de St.Dorval to the Chevalier de Sorville, at Paris.

Villa de Fiora, Tuscany. Your letter has followed me here : I dare not dwell on its contents: its arguments are unanswerable, for they are the vigorous offspringof that mens conscia recti

THE NOVICE OF

which, amidst the trials of your chequered life, and the vicissitudes of your sensible heart, has never deserted you. It is in you alone we trace the sanguine virtues of youth united to the wisdom of age and the cautions prudence of experience. It is for you only, great and amiable philanthropist ! to subdue the agonized throbbing of your own lacerated heart, to alleviate the sorrows or rectify the errors of your friend. But it is now too late. Julia de Ribe-mont is mine by every tie human and divine. She has flown from a world unworthy of her ; she has lost perhaps the languid approbation of the prejudiced, the pity of the ignorant, and forfeited those possessions for which alone the unfeeling de Montargissought her alliance: but she has bestowed on your friend an inexhaustible mine of felicity, and participates in all the happiness she confers. Let then my inexorable father renew his unnatural and cruel vow, which casts me for ever an alien from his love : let my enemies tri-

ST. DOMINI0K.

41

umph in the defeat of my prudence and the downfall of my pride : Julia de Ribe-mont is mine ! that sweet conviction fills my whole heart, nor leaves one avenue open to regret.

That I have stolen a portionless wife from the family of Monlargis, you tell me, is not the main object of my father’s implacable resentment ; but that in wedding a Hugonot, this unfortunate union may give birth to a race of heretics, whose apostacy shall cast an indelible stain on the uncontaminated faith of the house of St. Dorval, and forfeit the religious as well as the political principles of their ancestors, incessantly harrows his mind, and aggravates resentment beyond the power of reconciliation. Oh, de Sorville ! how little does he know of the liberal, the noble-minded Julia ! She already has no will but her husband’s ; and if her faith is founded on error, it is at least free from that pharisaical zeal and stubborn bigotry which the conscious infallibility of ours

THE NOVICE OF

inspires. The ardor of your friendship certainly misleads you, when you wish me to appear in the presence of my father ere the first flush of his anger has yet subsided. Time is the best soother of those irritations which flow rather from the passions than the reason. In the interim, add to all I already owe you by remaining with my father, and supplying to him that place his undutiful but still affectionate son has forfeited. You are his nearest relation ; your influence over him was once only second to mine, and now reigns unrivalled. You, who have lost a Rosalie de Vilette, can have no tie to attach you to the world but the benefit it may derive from your example and exertions. Oh ! in every thing my superior but in years, I place my destiny in your hands : steal me again into my father’s heart, and rescue the brilliant felicity I enjoy from those hovering shades with which the consciousness of filial ingratitude may at a future period obscure it.

/

ST. DOMINICK.

43

I cannot dismiss this letter without giving you some slight sketch of our present situation. The villa de Flora is the only inheritance I possess independent of my father. Even the diversified and beautiful landscapes of Provence can give you but a faint idea of the glowing charms of Tuscan scenery ; nor does Italy present ta the gaze of tasteful admiration a spot more luxuriant in beauty than the villade Flora. In this sweet retreat, imparadised in bliss, secluded from the world, its cares, its prejudices, lost to every reflection of the past, to every anxiety for the future, for three months, three fleet and rapturous months, the finger of smiling felicity daily wove such hours of bliss in the web of our existence as fancy’s bright idea gives to the heavenly, to the pure and subtle joys of Elysium. Oh ! how can I describe that crisis of bliss, where the full heart is insensible to a want! that union of soul which sympathy, friendship, esteem, and passion, inviolably confirm ; that soft delirium of the

44

TIIC NOVICC OF

senses which communicates the charm of love to every object around us, and represents them to the eye uryler a new and more delightful aspect than reality confers? I will not attempt to delineate what you have felt and I still enjoy. May they again be yours ! and may some other Rosalie de Vilette, fair, lovely, and excellent, as her you have lost, awaken you to a repetition of those exquisite feelings which are now, in the most extensive and refined sense, the possession of your friend ! Adieu !

St. Dorval.

I had almost forgot to mention a singular circumstance. Stephano, my father’s Spanish servant, and who has ever stood so high in his favor, has had a dispute with his lord, which has caused their separation ; and he has followed me to Italy, to seek an asylum in my little establishment. He supplicated me with tears in his eyes to receive him; and, as I remember him from my infancy, I could not refuse his

ST. DOMINICK.

45

request, which was seconded by the seducing1 intercession of my sweet Julia ; yet I know the fellow to possess all the gloom and bigotry which generally characterises his countrymen.

From the period in which this letter was written something more than a year fled away in the enjoyment of every social delight. A lovely infant became a new ligament in the indissoluble tie which bound the two fondest ofall human hearts ; and in the sweet and sacred character of a mother, Madame de St. Dorval shone with new lustre in the eyes of the father, the husband, and the lover. MeaDtime neither the soothing suggestions of natural affection, nor the never-ceasing intercession of the Chevalier de Sorville, could soften the asperity with which the prejudices of the Count St. Dorval regarded the conduct of his son, w hom he had formally deprived by will of all the law permitted to be withheld.

46

THE NOVICE OF

The old baron de Montargis was in the interim killed in an affray at Paris; and his son, in full possession of the forfeited estates of the heiress de Ribemont, publicly laughed at the romance of his successful and disinterested rival, and secretly nourished a hope of revenge, which he soon found an opportunity to display, though not wholly to accomplish. High in favour with Charles the Ninth, although a rigid Hugonot, he found means of insinuating a report to the royal ear, prejudicial to the loyalty of the house de St. Dorval. His son’s absence left the old count to stand the brunt of an accusation, which not even the suspicious tyranny of Charles could validate. This circumstance occasioned a rencontre between the count and the baron de Montargis, in which the former was slightly wounded. The report reached the ears of the younger de St. Dorval, and, for the first time since his marriage, contrition smote his heart. It was in vain he would have concealed from

ST. DOMINICK.

47

himself that his conduct had irritated de Montargis to the base revenge he had sought—a revenge that exposed his father to the ignominy of a public accusation ; that while this venerable father exposed his life in defence of his honor with youthful ardor, his son, amidst the soft and syren scenes of Italy, lapt in love’s Elysium, and wholly resigned to rapturous indolence, passed his youthful days amidst the inglorious joys of peace and love.

Even the blandishments of his beautiful wife, the infant caresses of his lovely daughter, failed to awTaken one thrill of rapture in a heart where remorse sat brooding over the keen plaints of conscience. It was at this period a letter arrived from the Chevalier de Sorville, his best and only friend, which finally determined him on a step he had long meditated.

<f Your father,” said the chevalier,et after having recovered his wound, and arrived from Paris at the chateau de St. Dorval in tolerable health and spirits, was

48

THE NOVICE OF

seized with a paralytic stroke. This is the second he has had since your marriage ; a third is to be feared, and will leave no hopes of his recovery. Need I add more to induce you instantly to set off for France ? Madame St. Dorval will join her seducing entreaties to mine, and assist in restoring you to your father. I have only to add, that the baron de Mon-targis has obtained the government of a northern province, and has left his young son to be educated at the chateau deMon-targis, to court the return of that popularity his father had justly forfeited.”

‘f Go,” said madame St. Dorval, throwing herself into her husband’s arms, when she had read this letter:	go,	and	com-

plete the happiness you have begun ; tc go, restore yourself to your father’s tf heart, and heal the only wound that cf rankles in that of Julia !”

The next morning St. Dorval set out for France; he parted from his wife and child, and parted with happiness for ever !

ST. DOMINICK.

49

On his arrival at Provence, he found the inhabitants of the chateau St. Dorval overwhelmed with consternation and sorrow.

“ It is in vain to conceal it from you/* said the chevalier de Sorville, embracing him; <r your father has just breathed his “ last.” St. Dorval sank lifeless into those arms which strained him to the noblest heart that ever throbbed in a human breast.

It was not tiil some days after the interment of the count’s remains, and until the first flow of that filial affection which remorse sharpened to insupportable agony in the breast of his son had subsided, that the will of the late count was opened, in the midst of a numerous assembly. The count St. Dorval and his friend the chevalier de Sorville alone testified no surprise on finding that the late lord of St. Dorval had left nothing to his son but that patrimony of which he could not deprive him ; and that the estate brought into the family by his alliance with his lady, (one

VOI. II.

c

50

THE NOVICE OF

of the richest heiresses in Prance,) together with vast personal possessions, were bequeathed to the chevalier cle Sorville.

The chevalier, approaching the notary, who read the will aloud, took it into his own hands, and, having looked it slightly over, tore it into a thousand pieces.— “ Thus perish/* said he firmly, “ the un-“just instrument of parental displeasure, “ framed under the immediate operation “of prejudice and passion! Had the “ count lived to recover his perfect senses, “ which the nature of his disorder de-“ prived him of so long before his death, “ thus would it have perished by his “ hands.*’ Then, throwing himself into the arms of St. Dorval, he added in atone of affectionate elation, “ Long may the “ count of St. Dorval live to enjoy thean-“ cient possessions of his illustrious ances-“ tors !’*

St. Dorval had a heart to feel as profoundly the generosity of his friend, as that inestimable friend had a soul capable

ST. DOMINICK.

51

of every act that raises humanity even above itself. In return for all he had voluntarily relinquished, the chevalier was with difficulty prevailed on to accept St. Dorval’s Tuscan estate, although extremely limited in an income which was rather the patrimony of the distressed than his own.

After some time spent in necessary arrangement, the count and his frien^ set off for Italy, to conduct the countess and her daughter back to France. The count had not acquainted his wife with his departure from France ; and his heart fondly sketched the idea of his unexpected return to Julia with all the delicate ardor of a lover, with all the more homefelt satisfaction of a husband. An absence of nearly two months had revived those fading flowers of passion which drooped beneath the ardor of unclouded possession ; and, distant from the object of his idolatry, fancy shed those divine attractions round her surpassing eyen the sweet reality of





52

THE NOVICE OF

her own perfections. The soft feelings of a father ameliorated the ardent enthusiasm of the lover, and a thousand hearts swelled in the bosom of St. Dorval when he arrived within view of the groves of de Fiora. Leaving his friend in the carriage, he mounted a swift horse, and proceeded (or rather fled) alone to the villa, jealous even that the eye of friendship should witness the sacred effusions of his enamoured heart, that heat with feverish violence.— As he fastened his horse to a tree at the end of the avenue which led to the house, and while his eager eye flung round on every side its quick enquiring glance, in fond expectation of lighting on the precious objects it sought, his trembling limbs scarce bore him to the portico : but Julia and her child reposed not beneath its marble shade, as they were w’ont in the meridian hour. When St. Dorval reached it, it was filled with domestics, who fled with horror and amazement at their master’s sight : at the same moment

ST. DOMINICK.

53

four strangers passed on, bearing a coffin on their shoulders ; and Stephano, the Spaniard, who followed it, caught the lifeless form of St. Dorval in his arms.— The fears of St. Dorval were not the phantoms of an anxious tender heart— Julia was no more !

The return of reason brought with it all the agony of unutterable woe. St. Dor-val burst from the arms of de Sorville, (who shed those tears the dry and inflamed eye of his friend could not weep,) and; with a frenzy that mocked the power of restraint, fled instinctively to Julia’s apartment. The bed wras hung with black, and covered with a pall : beside it lay the cradle of her infant ; the veil which was flung over it was that which Julia wore when St. Dorval last strained her to his heart. St. Dorval snatched it away, but it covere.d not the form of his child. He called alternately on the names of Julia and her daughter; no lisping murmur, no melting voice of tenderness, answered to the fran-

54

THE NOVICE OP

tic enquiries of the husband and the father. The image of despair in its gloomiest aspect, St. Dorval clasped his hands, and seated himself on Julia’s bed.

It was in that dreadful moment, when every feeling of his heart was wound up to the last strain of suffering; when conviction of the loss he had sustained touched the nerve of soul-felt sorrow even to the very quick ; when his wildly throbbing temples shot pangs of anguish through his burning brain, and his glaring eye and flushing cheek felt not the refreshing dew of one heart-easing tear: it was in that dreadful moment, when the blackest horrors of despair succeeded to the liveliest sweetest hopes of love and rapture, that the chevalier de Sorville sought to soften the silent stubborn sorrows of his friend by relating the melancholy cause which had awakened them. He read aloud the following letters, which were on the point of being dispatched to St. Dorval when he arrived at the villa de Fiora.

ST. DOMINICK.	55

Fragment of a Journal from Madame to M. de St.

Dorvaf.

Were I to tell thee at what hour in the twenty-four I miss thee most, it would be in the decline of the evening*, that sweet solemn season so dear to the pensive pleasures of the heart, so consonant to the tone of our minds and feelings, when day and night seem to struggle for that empire twilight has usurped ; when the western star sheds his pale light on the deep blue of the cloudless atmosphere, and the sun’s last fading blush still glows on the purple mists of evening. ’Tis then, solitary and alone, I wander to those luxuriant shades where, in the decline of a beautiful day, we used to repose. Fancy, animated by tenderness and regret, touches every object with the idea of my absent love; in every sighing breeze I hear the voice of St. Dorval, and a soft recollection of my husband steals on me from the view of every object. I weep, but by tears are not ungracious ; and I return home, and

56

THE NOVICE OF

court that repose which lures to my pillow the soft dream that «ives me back St.

O

Dorval, and mocks the power of absence. If will gladden thy fond heart to hear that some new intelligence daily beams on the seraph countenance of our little Imogen ; and I almost expect to hear her cherub mouth pronounce the name of mother. Oh ! what a joy were that to the mother’s doating heart! She almost springs from her nurse’s arms to mine, and with that eager look of joy her father’s speaking eye so often emanates. 'May’st thou,* said I this morning, ' resemble thy father ‘ in virtue as in person!’ The precious infant clung to my bosom, and seemed to smile assurance to my prayer.

To-day, as I spread my trinkets before her. she seized on the agate cross that was once thy sainted mother’s, (which you prize more from that circumstance than its intrinsic value,) and held it so fast that Ursuline, who is a right pious catholic, insisted on tying it round her neck ; and so

ST. DOMINICK.

57

it has become the little monopolizer’s property. Stephano, who was arranging a flower-vase at the time, looked on .with marked expression in his eye at the traps; .action : doubtless he thought it boded well of the future piety of our infant, in spite of her mother’s heresy. You know hiè bigotry $ yet he is a faithful soul, and officiously attentive in your absence. I have sat in the portico all day, watching the expected arrival of your courier, and have now returned to my own room to chide you for your inattention. Three long long weeks, and no letter for Julia ! Oh! that you may have received my packet! My heart can well judge of the anxiety of yours by that with which it is agitated at this moment. My spirits are wretchedly depressed ; and, without any immediate cause, my tears fall faster than I can write. I will invoke the talismanic power of my sweet infant’s smiles. At this moment f hear her sporting in Ursuline’s arms beneath the casement. Adieu, my love ! A c 2

hS

THE NOVICE OF

sweet evening succeeds to an oppressive and sultry day. I am going to join our little girl, and dissipate by a ramble the gloomy visions that crowd on my heart.— Adieu!

In continuation, by one of Madame St. Dorval's women.

Monseigneur,

When the countess arose from her escrutoire I gave her her veil, and she joined the nurse and child in the lawn. Near two hours had elapsed, when the countess returned alone. We were all surprised at her having kept the lady Imogen out in the evening air to so late an hour. The countess complained of extreme fatigue, and retired to her room : when she had undressed she went, as she was wont to do before she retired to rest, to visit the nursery ; but neither the infant nor Ursuline was there ! This was the more astonishing, as the countess had sent the child home early in the evening, and had rambled alone in the orangery. When

ST, DOMINICK.

59

inquiries were made, it was found that neither Ursuline nor the infant had returned. Although it was night, and a heavy rain began to fall, the countess, followed by some of the domestics (while others set out in different directions), flew to the spot whei^ she had parted with her child. It was near the skirts of the wood which runs to the rear of the villa; and at no great distance farther up in the wood, fastened by ropes to a tree, and exhausted with crying, they found Ursuline. She had been seized on by two men after she had parted from my lady: one held a pistol to her breast, while the other carried away the infant. The man who held her then bound her arms to a tree, and she had remained for more than an hour and a half in that situation. The countess retained her senses till she heard the melancholy detail, and then fell lifeless into the arms of her attendants. She was carried home; her garments were drenched with rain, as was her fine air, for

60

THE NOVICE OF

she ran out in her night dress, and without any covering on her head. It was generally believed that some robbers who lurked in the woods had carried off the infant for the sake of the jewels which it was my lady’s pleasure to deck her in. For two days every search was made : Ste-phano, who took it much to heart, scoured the country night and day; and the count de Morino made every exertion, but to no purpose.

Meantime a delirious fever seized on my lady, partly occasioned by the anguish of her mind, and partly by the dreadful cold she had caught on the fatal night when the child was stolen. She raved incessantly of her infant : it was impossible to prevail on her to go to bed : she wandered franticly about the house, and sometimes rambled out in the night air to the spot where she had parted with her child, while the fever raged in her veins. After five days thus spent her strength was exhausted, and she suffered us to convey her

ST. DOMINICK.

61

to her apartment ; but in passing near the nursery, she shrieked and flew to the cradle of her child : from this object it was impossible to part her ; it was therefore carried into her room, and placed by her bedside. Then she took off her veil, threw it over the cradle, and, seating herself by it, sung that sweet melancholy lullaby with which she was wont to lull the lady Imogine to repose. Sometimes she would gently raise the veil, and with a melancholy smile softly exclaim, <{ She sleeps!” then rock the cradle, and sing again. In this manner she passed (he night: towards morning she knelt down, and, laying her head on the cradle, appeared to fall into a deep sleep—from whence she awoke no more !

Here oblivion drops the veil, and shades the expression of those woes which fancy dares not delineate, which memory dares not dwell upon.

The count of St. Dorvals sudden loss

62l

THE NOVICE OF

of father, wife, and child, with all their aggravating circumstances, was too much for the tenderness of his heart, or the strength of his mind: the former sank beneath reiterated anguish ; the latter gave way to the torrent of affliction that overwhelmed it. Amidst the general wreck, reason was dispossessed of her empire ; and for two years her light beamed no ray on the darkened soul of St. Dorval.

In the first moment of his recovered senses he recommenced that hopeless search for his child which the chevalier de Sorville had continued with unabated ardor: hope still mocked him in the pursuit, and to the agony of suspense the horrors of irrevocable certainty at last succeeded. Many a year since has rolled in gloom over the devoted head of St. Dorval, and brought in its course no beam of hope to illumine his dark fate. The retribution of heaven has fallen heavy on his heart; and til! the last sad remnant of of life he will continue to expiate that one

ST. DOMlNjCK.

63

act of filial disobedience from whence all his after-sorrows flowed.

CHAP. XIV.

.—-Discretion has so far fought with nature.

That he with wisest sorrow thinks on her.

Together with remembrance of himself.

Shakespeare.

WITH the profoundest interest, the most eager curiosity, and breathless haste, Imogen perused the manuscript: and even when she had finished it, her eye still recurred to the letter written in her mother's hand, dictatedby her mother’s heart ; while the fondness of fancy was willing to believe that the tear which fell to the memory of that sainted mother bathed those lines long since imbued with the precious dew of maternal delight. “"Yes,” said Imogen, ft dear and tender mother! you were hast-(( ening to bless me with a last embrace “ when your hand traced the last aflec-fl tionate sentiment : my infant accents

64

THE NOVICE OF

“ then reached your delighted ears, and the smiles you hastened to invoke al-tc ready breathed fresh spirit on thy sink-f‘ ing heart. And it was for me you died !” exclaimed Imogen, sobbing over the letter and pressing it to her lips. At that moment the count entered. Imogen arose, and threw herself into his arms : the count strained lier to his heart: silent was the indulgence of their emotions; tears, sighs, and mutual caresses, were the language of their hearts.

When they were seated, and their emotion had in some degree subsided, the count addressed his daughter. “ These papers, “ my sweet child,” said he, pointing to the manuscript, “ which I have collated ffand connected together as well as the unsettled state of my mind would admit, contain the history of the most interest-<c ing and eventful period of my life : what has since followed is little more than a fc blank. Six years after the death of f< your mother, I embraced a military life.

ST. DOMINICK.

65

" It was a letter from the late illustrious “ duke de Guise that roused me from the fr lethargy of despair. At a period when “ every gentleman in France embraced “ the party consonant to his principles, I “ recollected that I was the last of the nobble house ofSt. Dorval; and, determined “ that the fading spirit of my family should emit one spark ere it became totally ex-tinct, and expire in a flame not unworthy “ of its ancient fire, 1 headed a numerous “ body of my vassals, and joined the Duke

c( de Guise at------. The prince, and his

“ brother the cardinal de Guise, were iu-" humanly and traitorously murdered by “ Henry the Third. The misfortunes of ct that illustrious family attached me more “ firmly to its interest; and I had the hap-“ piness to be instrumental in the escape “ of the young duke de Guise, imprisoned ft by the king on the murder of his father and uncle.*

• He was confined in the castle of Tours; and in 1591 contrived to effect his escape by the assistance

THE NOVICE OF

<f Amidst the harassing cares of a mili-" tary life, I have sought to bury the re-“ collection of my domestic misfortunes, (t and to forget the corroding sorrows of a f< broken heart. The lapse of seventeen ‘‘years has ameliorated the asperity of iCaffliction; and the recovery of my child, <f under the merciful providence of heaven, “ will, I trust, breathe fresh vigour on the <( long-fading springs of life, and give me <r yet a little longer to a world which now “ begins to wear the aspect of long-ba-"nishedjoy to my eye. Yet though my y heart confirms thee mine by all the “ sweet intuitions of nature, by the spirit ff of thy mother which breathes in thy “ accents, by that wondrous resemblance ,f of form which restores her to my view “ as when first I beheld her lovely and

of his valet-de-chambre, who amused his guard while he got in a small boat, anchored beneath his casement. At the other side of the river he was received by some of his most intimate friends, who waited there with horses»—See Cay et, vol. ii. book 3.

St. DOMINICK.

67

" blooming amidst the embowering shades cf of Montargis; and though that mark on <f thy cheek, that cross on thy bosom, are proofs irrefragable that thou art indeed my child, my sainted Julia’s child; yet “ still my heart languishes with curiosity ff to penetrate the veil of mystery that has so long concealed thee from my view. “ That you were forced from your nurse’s arms by robbers, lured to the barbarous “ act by the value of thy ornameuts, I ** entertain no doubt; but that they should “ have preserved thy life, and carried thee from Tuscany to the convent of St. Do-minick in Champaigne, is a mystery past “ solving. Oh, my sweet Imogen ! when scarce a week past I visited the convent (( of St. Dominick with my friend de “ Sorville, could I then have known that ‘f its walls probably enclosed my long-“ sought child !”

<f Gracious heaven ! my father ! You visit St. Dominick, and but a week r< back !” exclaimed Imogen, recalling the

THE KOVICE OF

emotion with which the count had first heard her mention the convent.

Didst thou not hear of the arrival of “ two strangers, who spent some time at “ the convent, on the day the sister Pasi-<c phae died?”

“ I did,” said Imogen ; “ they came “ with a dispensation from the Pope to <e enable the canoness to seek for health “ in a climate more genial to her scattered “constitution: but oh! they came too " late !”

“ Those strangers, Imogen, were de “ Sorville and your father.”

“ Gracious God ! my father !”

“ The canoness,” continued the count, “ was a woman of strong understanding, t( but the strength of her passion was pro-“ portioned to that of her mind. Her love “ for the chevalier became a part of her existence: neither philosophy nor rcli-“ gion were equal to its subjugation ; she “ cherished it in madness and in reason, “ in the world and amidst a convent’s

1

ST. DOMINICK

69

“ chilling gloom : it survived the wreck of hope, and baffled the oblivious spell of “ time. Not so de Sorville : he loved not <f less tenderly than his mistress, but the “ influence of reason was even stronger <c than that of love over his mind: he did “ not blindly resign himself to the infa-tuation of a first passion, and pursue its “ indulgence beyond the line of possibility; his thwarted affection gradually moderated into a tender interest and in-violable friendship for its once-adored “ object. He wrote to her, and his letters <f were fraught with the soothing atten-f< tions of humanity, the suggestions of “ reason, religion, and philosophy. Ro-" salie’s answers breathed only the soil of “ passion, animated, not restrained, by opposition. He ceased to write, and strove by silence to subdue the energy u of stubborn love in the bosom of the “ canoness. Her pride took the alarm, “ but her health became the victim of her ** feelings. Meantime the chevalier con-

70

TliE NOVICE OF

" tinued single, and lived the friend of “ mankind, the benefactor of society ; of “ no party in politics, of no sect in reli-u gion, he is at once patriotic, loyal, and " devout. His principles are not indeed " truly consonant to the present state of "society; and his Utopian system, his " love of civil and religious liberty, is ra-“ ther a beautiful than apracticable theory : " yet even his errors are amiable, for they " are the errors of a man too good for the “ world he lives in. Although his home “ was the villa de Fiora in Tuscany, the “ activity of his mind seldom suffered him “ to remain for any time its inhabitant ; “ and the tender and lively interest he still r; felt for the sister Pasiphae led him twice " in the year to the chateau de Rosemont, “ from whence his sister procured him in-" telligence of the long-declining canoness. " It was in his last visit he learnt from the “ physician of the convent that the ca-iC noness had no hope of life but from " change of air. At his desire I applied

ST* DOMINICK.

71

“ to the duke de Mayenne ; and through “ his interest at the court of Rome pro-“ cured a dispensation from his holiness, " enabling the nun to visit Marseilles, her “ native place.

“ I obtained leave to quit the camp, “ and accompanied him to the convent of “ St. Dominick ; and vve arrived there a “ few hours after her death. My duty “ obliged me to return to the camp. The “ chevalier loitered a day or two in the €t neighbourhood, and then returned to de “ Rosemont, where he still remains.

“ Then it i« certain,” said Imogen, “ I “ have beheld this great and amiable " friend ; and had my last visit to the con-“ vent been an hour earlier, might have " beheld him who now suffers me to call " him father.” She then related her adventure in the aisle of St. Dominick, on the night of the canonesss interment; and the mysterious visitor was no other than the chevalier de Sorville.

“ I knew,” said he, i( he meant to pay

72

THE NOVICE O*'

“ the last sad duty to his departed friend ; t( and it is perfectly consonant to the dc-<{ licacy of his character, that he should wish to indulge the luxury of sorrow unperceived, and escape the prying eye “ of vulgar observation : this melancholy “ and reserve is the true indication of that ct silent sullen grief which profound re-cc fined feeling only nourishes.”

The count then changed the conversation to a topic more immediately consonant to their respective interests. “ If,” said he, “ in a moment such as this, when heaven has granted to my wishes all they " panted after on earth, one repining thought could disturb my present feli-te city ; that thought of regret should be, <( that I am necessitated to suffer you, my beloved child, to remain one moment in a place and situation so every way im-“ proper for you : and though the delight " of beholding and conversing with thee “ supersedes in thy father’s heart every “ other sentiment, yet 1 hope, on this and

ST. DOMINICK.

73

'• every future occasion, he will always “ have the fortitude to sacrifice his own “ gratification to thy happiness. It is in-deed true, a father’s arms are a child>s “ best asylum: yet the uncertain and ha-“ zardous situation in which I am now placed, renders that asylum of a doubt-“ ful continuance ; and a residence in a tc camp is as little consonant to female de-ff licacy, as it is unsafe and incommodious. tf Deprived of all feinale attendance, ex-“ cept such as it were infinitely better to tJ want; without even a female dress, a “ want so frequently betrayed by those “ rising blushes, which so eloquently pour-“ tray the wounded feelings of violated modesty ; nothing can be less consonant “ to propriety than thy further residence <<r here, even though that residence were “ a certain one, and thy father’s protec-tion as permanent as it is now doubt-“ ful and unstable : for in the breast of a “ man of honour, no private claims, nor “ selfish feelings, can oppose themselves

VOL. II.	D

74

THE NOVICE OF

ec to the duty he owes society; and even (( though 1 still retained my sweet Imogen " amidst the tumults of a camp, the attec-“ tions of the father must still be subser-“ vient to the soldier’s duties. 1 have only “ to add, that, in acquainting thePduke de ^ Guise with the circumstances of my " child’s recovery, he has, with his usual “ goodness, anticipated my wishes, and ec offered me the protection of his mother, " who now resides, with her accomplished €C daughter,* at Guise; until his cause, no “ longer calling for thy father’s weak sujl-" port, shall enable him again to claim the “ precious deposit, and retire with his trea-iC sure to the shades of St. Dorval.”

Alas 1” said Imogen tenderly, "hast “ thou not said, a father’s arms are a child’s " best asylum ? Yet, if I must so soon re-“ sign this late-found dear asylum, why " not seek the protection of the chevalier " dc Sorville’s sister, madame de Rose-

Louisa tie Lorraine, afterwards princess de Conti.

ST. DOMINICK.

75

et mont, to whom the friendship of the “ minor canoness had already consigned

rf	'n

mer

ff Because/1 said the count gravely, a “ situation which might have been eligible for the fugitive novice of St. Dominick cc would be highly improper for the daugh-ct ter of the count St. Dorval. Madame de Rosemont, it is true, is amiable: yet “ in becoming an apostate to the religion of her ancestors, she did not, like her “ brother, embrace the mild principles of f< universal toleration ; she is a rigid Hu-gonot. Her husband, of the same per-suasion, died at the battle of Ivri by the " side of the king of Navarre, whose 0t strenuous partizan he was. Since that “ period the chateau de Rosemont has been “ an asylum to the enemies of the house “ de Guise and the catholic faith : to such an asylum shall the count de St. Dorval " commit his daughter ! he who is the avowed friend of the former, who would die in defence of the latter? Beside^

THE NOVICE OF

76

“ the tenderest anxiety of my heart could “ not select for thee a protectress more “ worthy of becoming such, than the “ duchess de Guise.* Not more eminent <c for the qualities of heart and understand-“ ing than celebrated for her refined and attic taste,, her polished and interesting “ manners, this superior and extraordi-f‘ nary woman unites all that is great and “ noble in our sex, with all that is excellent and amiable in her own. With courage to oppose adversity, even in its most “ dreadful form, with grandeur of soul to ft sustain undazzled the splendor of the most brilliant prosperity, her character “ is formed of the happiest elements; and “ lier great, her superior qualities are “ so blended with all the soft and pleasing. l( attractions, that, while she excites our re-“ verence, even to awe, she wins our love “ and secures our esteem. It is to this il-.

* Fot an account of the celebrated duchess de Guise, see Mémoires de Sully; and Bayle’s Dictionary, article Guise.



ST. DOMINICK.

tf lustrious princess, the boast of her coun-“ try, the idol of her friends, and even “ the admiration of her enemies, that I tr would consign my Imogen, my child ; un-“ til that happy period when I shall be en-“ abled to claim her to part no more.” The heart of Imogen, ever emulous of superiority, equally ambitious of virtue and of genius, swelled in her bosom, as her father pronounced the eulogium of the duchess de Guise.

“Yes,” said she with a sigh, “ I will leave “you, my father; let me not murmurât “ the first command a parent’s wish imposes. “ Yes, send me to this incomparable wo-“ man : with such a model in my view, “ perhaps, I may catch some of that ex-“ lence by which I shall become more “ worthy of being thy child.”

The count tenderly pressed the hand clasped in his. “ Continue but thyself,” said he; “ lose not the tender blush that fC mantles on thy cheek ; let not that “source dry up which sends the tear of

THE NOVICE OF

feeling to thine eye, the smile of rapture to thy lip, the sacred source of sensi-bility. Seek not to imitate, but to im-prove, even to perfection, the excellen-'f ces of thy nature ; and thy father’s tf heart desires no more.”

The count then mentioned, that a courier, which the duke de Guise was dispatching under escort to his mother, took to the duchess a letter of recommendation from her son in favour of Imogen ; and that nothing remained but to procure leave from the commander-in-chief to accompany her himself to Guise. fc I am now obliged/’ said he, to attend a council ff of war, which is to be held in this tent; I shall then seize the most favourable oc-

casion of preferring my request.”-----

“ And heaven send it may be granted !” said Imogen eagerly:	for to confess the

“ truth, my lord, my late adventures have ff rather increased my timidity than added “ to my courage; it is in your presence “ only I feel that guardian safety so long “ denied me.”

ST. DOMINICK.

79

if May your father long have it in his |f power to afford it thee !” said the count, rising ; then telling her that she might expect him back in less than an hour, he adjourned to the tent of the duke de Mayenne.

This hour was spent by Imogen in a variety of reflections, of which her father was the principal subject. Endowed by nature with that all-pervading, all-penetrating apprehension, which mocks even the partial bias of affection, and pierces the veil in which the solicitude of tenderness shrouds the failings of its object; neither the strong sympathy which apparently existed between her father’s character and her own, the prepossessing urbanity of his manners, nor that fond partiality which the connection subsisting between them was alone sufficient to inspire, could conceal from Imogen that many an error of education, many a prejudice of party and of religious growth, were associated with the best principles of his mind, and shed

so

THE NOVICE OF

their poison on the best feelings of his heart. She could not but recollect that in his little biographical sketch of himself, the sect he professed was always mentioned as the only true and infallible religion that with equal tenacity he adhered to the supposed justice of the cause he had embraced, rather from hereditary principle than the conviction of reason ; that be bad mentioned the sublimb, the philanlhropic sentiments of the chevalier de Sorville as a beautiful rather than a practical theory ; and that the friendship of his sister was rejected because she was a Hugonot, and afforded a charitable asylum to the unfortunate of the same persuasion ! Yet, even with all these errors of the mind, Imogen worshiped the still-warm and tender sensibility of her father’s heart ; the still surviving enthusiasm of his character ; the apparent gentleness of his disposition ; and that mild benevolence which, superior to prejudice, shone in his open countenance, as if eager to volunteer in the service of

ST. DOMINICK.

81

humanity, independent of every political and religious distinction : but what her heart most lamented was the tie which bound him to a party whose unstable foundation was fast falling to decay.

Of the hereditary and lineal claims of Henry IV. to the throne of France her historical knowledge had furnished her with sufficient and undeniable proofs; and the amiable, the magnanimous character of the monarch had long awakened a personal interest in his favor, in a heart which swelled at the splendid feats of the hero, and melted in all the sympathy of kindred virtue over the milder perfections of the man. She was not, however, sufficiently acquainted with her father’s character to dare to combat its prejudices.

While she yet dwelt on them with tenderness and regret, the count entered the tent; he was followed by a subaltern, to whom he was busied in giving some professional instructions. Meanwhile the domestics spread a table with more elegant d 2

THE NOMCE OF

and luxurious fare than a flying camp might be supposed to afford. The story of the count's discovery of his daughter in his prisoner had obtained a pretty general circulation through the camp, and excited a general interest, which the count’s domestics particularly displayed by the curiosity, tempered only by respect, with which they regarded their young mistress ; who, though wrapped up in the minstrel’s graceful robe, so as scarcely to betray what modesty herself might proudly reveal, blushed at the unseemly habit which disguised the feminine form of its lovely wearer. The count's delicacy awaked to the influence of his daughter’s; he dismissed the attendants, and they sat down to table with only a page in waiting. An air of dejection and reserve seemed diffused over the manners of the count, which equally intimidated Imogen from enquiring into their cause, or demanding the success of his request. Her father spoke little, and ate less; and, when the dinner

ST. DOMINICK.

S3

service was removed, lie arose from the table, and threw himself on a couch.— Thither Imogen followed ; and, seating herself beside him, with that air of timid softness that feared to be intrusive, yet languished to alleviate the melancholy it witnessed, she exerted with gradual increase all those soothing arts, whose witchcraft steals sorrow from itself, and winds round the heart with imperceptible power. Hut, as she faintly endeavoured to rally back the retreating spirits of her father by the affected vivacity of her own, in. the smile of sadness that repaid her obvious and tender endeavours Imogen traced their inefficacy.

“And must I part from thee ?” said the count, after a long pause, gazing on her through tears of fondness.

“ But for a short time 1 hope, dearest “ sir,’* said Imogen, with a smile and a sigh.

“ God grant !” said the count fervently.

“ Oh! he will, he will !” said Imogen

64	THE NOVICE OF

with animation : ff He whose goodness has te thus providentially restored thee to thy cc child, will still preserve her to thee : (C and, trust me, my heart’s forebodings ff are light and pleasant; they whisper ic hope and happiness to my soul, and re-vel in the fond anticipation of a speedy and indissoluble re-union.”

The kiss which she impressed on her father’s hand seemed to seal the assurance, although the tear that bathed it spoke her hopes not unalloyed by tender apprehension. The count, drawing her towards him, and gazing delightedly, yet pensively, on her interesting and eloquent countenance, exclaimed : <c Child of my e< heart’s fondest care ! lovely beam whom u the pitying mercy of heaven has sent “ to illume the gloom of my fading life ! îf every moment, in unfolding to my view cc the sweet revival of thy sainted mother’s “ perfections blooming amidst thine own, “ draws thee nearer to my heart, and ren-*' ders that heart still more loth to part

ST. DOMHSICK.

85

<c with all it loves on earth : yet such is “ the unfortunate pressure of circum-“ stances, that, though this day only has “ given thee to my arms, to-morrow tears *e thee from them !”

" To-morrow!” faintly ejaculated Imogen.

“ Thou knowest,” continued the county “ that the king at the head of his army “ has sat down before the gates of Laon, one of the principal towns in the pos-n session of the League. It is much feared t( the city must surrender ; nothing indeed can prevent it, but the success of a ff scheme adopted by the duke de May-<f enne and the Spanish genera], the count “ de Mansfield.”

u And what is that scheme ?” eagerly demanded Imogen.

“ To send a considerable convoy of am-“ munition and provisions, under a strong (< escort, to the besieged.”

And is that practicable, my lord ?”

“ It wilt at least be hazardous,” said

sc

THE NOVICE OF

the count, shaking his head; “ and who ff can hope to frustrate the vigilance of ‘f the all-observing Henry?”

“ But how does it immediately affect “ us, my dear father?’"

ff Imogen, at the moment I was about u to prefer my request to conduct you to <c Guise, I found the convoy was appointed to set olf by to-morrow’s dawn, and that cf I had the honour to be appointed the second in command.”

Imogen turned pale. ff To leave thee behind me is impossi-ble; and the only plan left me to pur-“ sue is such as my heart, and probably “ thy courage, will shrink from encouu-tering.”

<f Give peace to thine own heart, and " fear not my courage, my lord,” said Imogen firmly.

*f Well then, my sweet heroine,” said the count with a melancholy smile, I f< was thinking, that, as the route of the “ convoy lies for a considerable way along

S*T. DOMINICK.

87

cf the high road to Guise, to send you in a a litter, under its escort, so far on your a way, and to consign you to the care of “ my most trusty servants and esquire for “ the rest of your journey.”

“ My dear sir,” said Imogen, with a sigh, “ to deliberate would be vain, where “ there is no alternative. The hazard of ~ such an enterprize will be, doubtless, infinitely less than our mutual fears will c< be apt to imagine; and to encounter a probable risk is at least preferable to ic awaiting a certain danger. For my own part, I have no fears but what a fc separation from you awaken.”

“ Sweet child !” said the count, rather apostrophizing than addressing her, and fc innocent as sweet! thou knowest not ff that woman, lovely helpless woman, in junctures such as these, is surrounded f‘ by dangers whose cause lives within “ herself.”

f£ Do you then think our scheme a ha-“ zardous one?” demanded Imogen.



+4 . V •

-

' *



'	-	««■	t-

»	i	v •

*m "f i- •'	'	•	‘K	«

■ ■>*

* - • - . •#— .

V

ST. DOMINICK.

89

gen’s litter was to be placed near the centre of the convoy, where the count’s command would chiefly lie. Her packet from the canoness to madame de Rosemont and the chevalier de Sorville, with her father’s papers, were to he instantly dispatched to the latter; and Imogen, when she arrived at the duchess de Guise’s, was to write to the abbess of St. Dominick and the lady Magdelaine de Montmoreil, informing them of the discovery of her parents, to thank them for their attention, and to send a magnificent present to the former, as a gratuity for the support afforded her from her earliest years by the convent.

For this and every other purpose her rank in life and situation at the hotel de Guise might require, the count wras to send an unlimited order to his banker at Paris, to supply her with whatever sums of money she might demand. Then, observing that a cloud still hung over the spirits of his daughter, he proposed, to amuse her, that they should adjourn to the

90

THE NO\ ICE OF

outer division of the tent, to take a yiew of the camp without being’ seen.

Imogen, ever alive to the pleasure a novel spectacle affords to a young mind, delightedly assented. The count fondly drew her arm through his own, and passed on to what might be called the anti-chamber of the tent; then, partly concealing themselves behind the drapery of the scarlet curtain* which shaded its entrance, a scene equally animated and interesting presented itself to their view.

The sun was setting in cloudless splendor. Over the plain, where the camp extended to a considerable distance, the arms of the soldiery glittered to its beams ; the unfurled banners, gently agitated by the evening breeze, glowed with its departing blushes ; the gaudy streamers,

* Nothing could be more splendid than the camp of the Leaguers: the luxury and ease in which the duke de Mayenne revelled in the midst of his army did not escape the sportive raillery of the witty king.

ST. DOMINICK.

91

which distinguished the tents of the officer from the subaltern, caught the warm reflection ; and the flood of crimson light which flowed from the west imbued every object with its rich and mellow tints.— The splendid armour of the warrior chief, his snowy plumage and flowing mantle, as he leaned on his glittering falchion, or with haughty strides traced the accustomed rounds, gave to his manly form that chivalrous air of dauntless valour, which the magic illusion of romance sheds on the hero of its own creation. The soldiers under arms were going through their accustomed evolutions, while the troops not on immediate duty were scattered in various groups through the intersected avenues formed by their tents. Some, leaning on their lances, seemed to betray the heat of the argument they discussed by the vivacity of their gestures ; some were staking their newly-gained spoil at quoits ; and others, lolling before their tents, hummed their provincial songs, or sent

92

THE NOVICE OF

back their pensive thought to the beloved and peaceful home of their youth ; while the air of gay-hearted hilarity which was distinguishable in the countenance and gestures of the French troops,, formed a lively contrast to the solemn deportment and Moorish gravity that marked the appearance of the Spanish soldiery. The trumpet’s shrill blast, the drum’s deep-toned beat, and the confused murmur of many thousand voices ascending on the air, with the martial music of the various military bands; all these intermingling sounds, so appropriate to the scene, gave it the last finish ; and to the vivid and romantic fancy of the young spectatress it appeared rather as a splendid effort of fairy conjuration, than a spectacle of real existence.

The count watched, with delighted satisfaction, those traits of natural and lively emotion which gradually betrayed themselves on the animated countenance of his daughter. “ All,” said he mentally.

ST. DOMIVICft.

93

“ sweet child of nature, is pleasing to thee, "because all is new: O youth, what a season of delight is thine!”

The curiosity and pleasure of Imogen seemed incapable of satiety ; and she gazed on the busy scene before her, till the sun sent no dying beam to the horizon, and the shadows of night floated in grey vapours on the plain, involving every object in its undistinguishing hue: already the watch-fires glimmered with dusky flame through [the curling mists ; and through the waving drapery of the tents, the illuminations within flung their broken light; while the gaudy crowd, which lately strewed the plain, retired to snatch such temporary rest as the uncertain destiny of war permits ; all but the night-watch, whose heavy pacing step vibrated along the allotted round, mingling their fainter echoes with their armours’ clanking sounds, the chargers’ hollow neighings, and the drum’s last order of retreat. Then all was still, and silence hung upon the death of every sound.

THE NOVICE OF

From this scene of interest the solicitude of the count for the health of his daughter obliged her to retire : they returned to the interior of the tent, which was lit up : and while they refreshed themselves wifh fruit and some light wine, the count informed his daughter, that he should write that night to the chevalier de Sor-ville, in order to bring hrm to the camp, that he might inform him himself of the happiness he enjoyed in the recovery of his child, whose loss the chevalier almost equally lamented with her father; and that he should also write a letter to the duchess de Guise, giving an abstract of Imogen’s life, and the circumstances of her recovery.

And now, my child,*’ said the count, with an air serious and impressive, “ lend me, fora few minutes, thy undivided attention. He, who alone sees into the cc unborn events of futurity, and who holds (< in his almighty grasp the destinies which “ govern the universe, can alone know the

ST. DOMINICK.

95

“ result of the hazardous enterprize we “ are now venturing’ on. But, whatever may be thy earthly father’s fate, thy “ Father which is in heaven will, I trust, “ encompass thee with the shadow of his wing, and guard thy life and innocence ct for the enjoyment of happier years than e< have yet been thine. Nay, hear me out, f< sweet Imogen ! I w’ould willingly believe that safety hovers round thee with guar-dian care; that thou wilt reach in per-£f feet security the hospitable asylum of “ thy illustrious protectress ; and that thy ff father, having fulfilled his duty as a ff soldier, shall soon be able to gratify “ the feelings of the man ; to retire from ff the harassing cares of warfare, and close the evening of a storey life in the bosom of domestic felicity. Such are the sug-te gestions of hope and probability ; but “ while there is a possibility of the re-“ verse, let us at least endeavour to pro-vide against those conjunctures it may “ not be practicable for human power to

96

THE NOVICE OF

‘f prevent, I may fail in the attempt I “ have undertaken ; for to deserve suc-“ cess confers no irrefragable claim on its “ possession : and you, who have already ff been a prisoner to one army, may be-“ come, under the influence of war’s un-“ certain fortune, the captive of another. u Should I fall, the chevalier de Sorville “ will claim you as the daugher of his “ friend : should I survive the enterprize, " you will need no other champion : but “ this remember, should a fatal chance “ throw you for a time into the hands of ct the royalists, be not too prompt to re-“ veal your rank and name; for high in " the royal army stands the betrothed hus-<f band of your mother, the deadly enemy " of your father, the baron de Montargis. “ Thy second loss, like the first, would af-ff ford a triumph to his malice, and might retard thy liberation ; or, by promoting “ it, render thy father the debtor of him to whom he would scorn to owe a less consequent obligation. Not only the

ST. DOMINICK.

97

c* baron, but his son, now advanced in the <c bloom of manhood, basks in the sunshine " of courtly favour : the tie of interest c‘ alone unites Henry to the father, but it “ is supposed the stronger bond of sym-te pathy draws his royal favour towards the “ son : for the king affects to admire ro-ce mantic heroism in the field, and ro-mantic sentiments in the closet ; and “ the younger de Montargis either alfecls or possesses both. He has already been “ involved in a dangerous adventure, “ which led him into the heart of our camp, " from which lie narrowly escaped; and the king, instead of reprimanding his boyish imprudence, has recompensed " with knighthood and military command (f what he deems his dauntless valour. “ From the power of the cold-iron heart-“ ed de Montargis, and his self-sufficient “ and inflated boy, may heaven guard “ and preserve my child !”

Imogen's spirits were sunk even to tears by the apprehensions her father’s con-

YOL. II.	E

98

THE NOVICE OF

sation awakened, and she wept in silence on his shoulder.

“ Nay, beloved/’ said he, tenderly pressing her to his heart, f‘ I feel that it is but a timid excess of affection that “ tinges my foreboding thoughts with the “ sad gloom of apprehension/'

“ And, I trust, but the timid excess of mine,5’ said Imogen, smiling through her tears, “ that renders my heart so much “ alive, to the infection of your tender fC fears. Yet you shall find, my lord, I Ci will not disgrace my doublet and hose ;

and that to-morrow I shall catch a spark “ of thy fire, whose vital warmth shall diffuse hope and courage through every “ artery of my heart.”

ct Till that eventful to-morrow,” said the count, embracing her, cc repose in peace ; for the fatigues thou must un-“ dergo call for that strength of frame and “ spirits the soft restorer of nature’s wea-“ ried powers can best bestow.”

Imogen then, at her father’s request, re-

ST. DOMINICK.

99

tired to the apartment where she had slept the preceding night ; and where a female night-dress, coarse but cleanly, had been provided for her, by the woman who had attended her in the morning.

Imogen sought not to woo repose to her pillow when she pressed it : the variety and nature of those reflections which agitated her-mind forbade its influence: the extraordinary events of the past day still recurred to her apprehension ; the uncertain fate which hung upon the future wearied her imagination. Safety or danger alternately soothed or destroyed her hopes; and now she beheld herself the distinguished guest of the illustrious duchess de Guise, and now the orphan captive of the implacable and haughty de Montargis. Then the terrors of her scared fancy sought oblivion in a fond re*» currence to her father’s history. The romantic enthusiasm of St. Dorval, the splendid virtues of de Sorville, the mild excel-cellence, the winning perfections of Ju-

100

THE NOVICE OF

lia, alternately floated in her memory, nor did the scenery of St. Dorval and de Mon-targis claim less interest than the events and characters by which it was animated.

Provence and its classic river, which the eager eye of Imogen had so often sought upon the chart of France, and which ever appeared to that enamoured eye as traced in those living characters which chemic art designs, with a fire of electricity, communicating a soft vibration to every fibre of her heart, had been the scene of her parents’ youthful loves, the residence of her ancestors, and probably would be the future home of her life. The mention of the Durance in her father’s manuscript had awakened the associating principle of thought : and her heart with logical accuracy severed each closely-linked idea; till that which occasioned a fond recollection of the minstrel filled her whole mind, and, mingling with the stealing visions of repose, shed over her slumbers the dream of love and fancied bliss.

ST. DOMINICK.

101

CEA?. XV.

A touch more rare subdues all paugs, all fears.

SlIAKSPEARE^

As waves white-bubbling over the deep come swelling, roaring on, as rocks meet roaring waves, so foes attacked and fought; mau met with man, and steel with steel ; shields sound and warriors fall : as an hundred hammers on the red son of the furnace, so rose, so rung their swords.

Ossian.—Fingaly b. 4.

THE busy murmur of the camp chased the spirit of repose from the pillow of Imogen. She arose, and was already equipped for her journey when her father entered the apartment : the pale cheek, the heavy eye, betrayed the nocturnal vigils of the count. With the morning salutation he gave his daughter a tender embrace, and informed her the convoy was then drawn out, and the litter, which was to convey her, in readiness.

To Imogen the laconism of his manner betrayed a heart hut ill at ease 3 for ex-

108

THE NOVICE OF

tremc anxiety is seldom loquacious. Having forced her to take some refreshment, he led her to the entrance of the tent, close to which stood a small litter drawn by four horses, and surrounded by four of the count’s domestics in military habits. The count again in great emotion embraced his child, gave her a tender but faint benediction, placed her in the litter, and, mounting a fierce charger, himself led the way to the convoy, which was on the point of marching. The litter was placed in the centre of the ammunition-waggons : the count, at the head of his troop, rode at the distance of a few paces from it. The heart of Imogen throbbed with violence; her eye, which would have sought the comfort of her father’s presence, shrunk from the inquisitive gaze of every curious spectator. The trumpet’s shrill blast echoed alongthe extended line ; the word of command flew from rank to rank : in an instant the whole body was in motion.

ST. DOMINICK.

103

It proceeded for some leagues in that careless security the sanguine hope of success inspired : already the beaming spires of Laon flash on their eyes ; already the banners of the League appear to float on its ramparts. These objects, whether real or imaginary, stimulate their exertion, and change expectation into certainty: while, triumphing in their nearly-realized and hazardous project, they reach the wood which lies half-way between the forests of La Fere and Laon, the most critical point on their route; and the count beholds at a trivial distance the road where his daughter’s equipage separates from the convoy, and proceeds, without the apprehension of danger, to the town of Guise: when lo ! the sudden signal of alarm blown by the war-horn vibrates from the advanced guard along the line, and rouses the inflated warriors to a variety of motion and energetic effort; the hauberk suddenly raised, the spear as swiftly pointed, the lance boldly couched, the

104:

THE NOVICE OF

clash of arms resounding on every side ! 3<Vom the chief in command the deep-toned war voice thunders its orders ; his subalterns give it endless echo: every feature of alarm, eagerness, and exertion, burst around, like so many refractions of light from the dusky surface of a flint. The vivacity of the youthful warriors, rushing impetuously to the charge, is scarcely repressed by the veteran’s scanning look of cool experience: young velocity scarcely rivals ancient vigour in exertions of nervous energy : while, amidst this scene of wild and furious tumult, one soul seems to impel and animate the whole,— eager anxiety to engage, with due subordination to supreme command.

The escort of the convoy now halt to receive and oppose the furious charge made on it by a considerable detachment of the royal army, headed by the gallant duke de Biron. The attack is made and sustained with equal fury. Already the cavalry are forced to retreat to the sides

ST. DOMINICK.

105

of the waggons; and the onset made by the royalists on the infantry i« so overwhelming, that, unable to resist the torrent, they seek temporary shelter amidst' the carts which convey the ammunition. Meantime the Spanish battalion, desperate from the dilemma to which the horse’ and foot arc reduced, rushed madly forward with an attack so vigorous, that the royalists, discomfited, begin to retreat in confusion and dismay. It is then that the noble duke de Biron, with all the spirit of heroic ardour, commands a hundred gentleman of illustrious birth, who had accompanied him, to alight, arm themselves with pistols, and fight hand to hand !— From that moment the combat rages with a fury that mocks the order of discipline. Chief grapples with chief; and the subaltern, twining his arms round those of his opponent, shares with him the same glorious grave. The French fire at last subdues the Spanish firmness : the escort gives way on every side, and flies in every. e 2

106

THE NOVICE OF

direction : the victors pursue them with desolating fury, and suffer but a few to return to their camp, the sad historians of their dire defeat ; then, having sated their vengeance on the enemy, fake charge of the prisoners, and, laden with spoil, provisions, and ammunition, return in triumph to the royal army.

Among the sad and various pictures of human suffering which this scene of carnage and desolation presented, the most affective was that which the situation of the count St. Dorval and his daughter afforded. On the first alarm the count rode up Lo the litter, and, in a tone of voice he meant should be inspiriting, attempted to soothe those apprehensions in the timid bosom of his daughter, which on her account he could not extinguish in his own. Then, called on to lead his troops, with a look of agony he returned the heartbreaking glance of Imogen ; who now, lost to every sense but that which general terror and apprehension for her father in-

ST. DOMINICK,

107

spired, gazed on the scene of horror and tumult before her, under the influence of a dreadful suspense less supportable than, the most fatal certainty. Meantime the combat became every moment more fierce, more desperate.

The count fought, almost beneath the eye of his shuddering daughter, with the dauntless valour of heroic youth, tempered by the cool sagacity of a veteran ; and stimulated to exertion almost more than human by his own private interest, in addition to his ardour for the common cause in which he embarked. It was the various feelings of the father, the man, the soldier, that combined their influence, nerved his arm, and gave force and vigour to every exertion. The eye of the almost-breath^ less Imogen still pursues the rapid lightning of his brandished sword: amidst the general uproar his form only presents itself, his voice only vibrates on her ear, every emotion of her beating heart is condensed into the one overwhelming appre-

103

THE NOVICE OF

liension for his safety. She beholds him carried away by the disorder of the troops from that station affection had fixed near her Jitter; she sees him sustain a variety of attacks; she sees his helmet cleft in twain ; she beholds a cavalier single him out with savage ferocity, at the moment that his troop with the rest fly in disorder; his horse, covered with wounds, sinks beneath him ; his opponent joins in the pursuit : the count, on foot and wounded, totters towards the litter; then, faint with loss of blood, sinks beside it, while two soldiers advance freely towards the prostrate hero with looks of desperation and brandished spears.

At that moment the woman’s heart of Imogen ceases to tremble. She springs from the litter ; the affections of that warm heart, stimulated by filial duty, worked on by tenderness, compassion, and apprehension, for its object, brace every nerve with a strength that mocks the timid calculation of danger, and braves the form

ST. DOMINICK.

109

of peril in its most dreadful aspect ! She flings herself beside her father; and, with her outstretched arms, forms around him a shield consecrated by nature. The soldiers brutally attempt to tear her from the bleeding* bosom of her parent; they succeed in their savage endeavours : a shriek of agony burst from her quivering lips; she struggles, she pants ; her mind ceases to be conscious of its sufferings; the heroism of sensibility is fled ; nature takes its course; she falls lifeless to the earth, already strewn with the bodies of the dead !

A young cavalier of splendid appearance, who had viewed the singular scene at some distance, as, disgusted with the unsatiated ferocity of his fellow conquerors, he halted in pursuit of the conquered, now rode up to the soldiers, and ordered them at their peril to take care of the young prisoner ; whose form alone betrayed his youth, for the face of his captive was smeared with that blood which had flowed

110

THE NOVICE OF

from a wound in her arm she had received in her last struggle with those who tore her from her father’s breast. The cavalier was then borne away by the torrent which poured on in pursuit of the vanquished.

Thrown in a cart among the wounded and the dying, Imogen, after a long suspension of every faculty, awakened to a sense of her situation : that sense was but transitory; the agonies of her mind, together with that of her wound, plunged her again into all the oblivion of total insensibility, and one fainting fit succeeded another until they reached the royal camp.

It was in a large tent, and stretched on a straw mattress, that perfect consciousness of the late events and her present situation was restored to her. The groans of the wounded soldiers who lay round her vibrated in her ears. She raised her languid eyes, and beheld the suffering wretches attended by a grave formal-looking man ; who, regardless of the impatient supplications of agony, with a cold.

ST. DOMINICK.

Ill

deliberate, and unfeeling air, went through the discharge of his duty professionally methodical. Imogen was the last to share his attention. He raised her arms ; and, after having slightly examined the wound, with a supercilious smile, turned (o a hag of wizard-like appearance, who followed him, and exclaimed : “ Dame, here is room for your skill ; apply some of your sim-“ pies to this young cavalier’s scratch/* Then, with an air of careless indifference, he left the tent. The old sybil roughly seized the bleeding arm of the invalid ; and, fixing her ghastly eyes on the shuddering form of the prisoner, with a loud laugh exclaimed :	Marry, forsooth, a

“ pretty valiant cavalier truly, to faint tf with the scratch of a pin ! Why, sir Ci knight of the fairies, thou should’st never <f have come within arm's length of thy lady-mother’s bodkin. Mass ! thou wert “ a rare gentleman to leave thy nurse’s tc arms, and come a soldiering. An* the tc duke de Guise has no stouter swordmen

112

THE NOVICE OF

“ than thee, our good king might win his; c< whole army with a handful of sweet-

meats.’*

During this curious (and, from her dialect, almost unintelligible) harangue, she was busied in applying, simples, and tying up the arm of her patient. She then, humming an old ballad, left the tent. The agony of bodily suffering soon lulled the companions of Imogen into a torpor that resembled sleep:	Imogen's	deeper

wounds were of the heart, and bled in anguish over the doubtful fate of her unfortunate father. Still he appeared to her eye, as it had last beheld him, prostrate on the earth, the blood gushing from his breast, the grey locks of his uncovered head bathed in the vital stream, the torture of his mind distorting every feature, as, with a feeble arm, he endeavoured to withhold his child from the grasp of violation, then overpowered sank lifeless on the earth. In all the frenzy of grief such a recollection was calculated to inspire.

-n

ST. DOMINICK.

113

Imogen started from her straw-bed ; and paced the narrow limits of her tent with a hurried step, whose echo caught the attention of the sentinel without. Why, tc monsieur/’ said he, looking in on her, “ for aught I see, there is no use in keep-“ ing you in the hospital who are so light “ of foot, and keeping others out in the open air who are not able to crawl. Here, monsieur,” addressing the ser-jeant of the guard, " pray cast an eye fi upon this parti-coloured cavalier, who “ looks more like a charlatan than a sol-<f dier. Mort de ma vie ! you succour a “ town blocked up by our glorious king ! “ I wot thou should’st have stayed with “ thy boy-general, the little duke, and “ helped him to whip tops and play at quoits. Sacre Dieu I you victual a town !”

“ Why, this is the minstrel-like youth,” said the serjeant, gazing on Imogen with a look of recognizance, f f who got between “ us and the rebel count St. Dorval. I

THE NOVICE OF

<f trow, we had made him pay for his in-“ terfering, but for our colonel, who gave us some kind of charge about him ; and so we had the; humanity to spare his life, and fling him into a cart with the killed and wounded.”

Imogen, in whom the power of articulation seemed wholly suspended, now raised her timid eyes, and in a voice faint and indistinct said :

“ Will you suffer me, monsieur, to ask " one question ?”

“ Let it be a brief one then,” said the serjeant bluntly.

“ Did the count de St. Dorval survive tc your attack ?”

The serjeant with a malicious smile turned upon his heel, and, calling out to a soldier underarms, bade him take charge of that prisoner, and conduct him to the next tent on the left, where the last prisoner had died of his wounds ; then, roughly seizing her by the arm, pushed her forward. Imogen, unresisting, faint, and trem-

ST. DOMINICK.

115

bling, followed the soldier; and, eagerly shunning the gaze of unfeeling curiosity her singular appearance attracted, raised not her eyes till she reached the place of her destination. It was a small tent, furnished with a mattress, table, chair, mirror, and a few other articles, such as spoke its late occupant to be a prisoner of no mean rank ; and Imogen doubted not but she owed the comparative comfort of her present habitation to the interest she had awakened in the bosom of the superior officer alluded to by the serjeant, but of whose humane interference in her favour she had not, amidst the horrors and tumults of the scene, retained the faintest recollection : and supposing the serjeant had followed her, she turned round to enquire intoa circumstance that at once awakened hope and gratitude, when she perceived he was gone. She then advanced to the door of the tent, and attempted to address the sentinel who paced with measured step without it ; but, rudely inter-

116

TJIE NOVICE OF

rupting her, he pointed his bayonet as if to prevent her advancing, and told her lie had received orders to hold no parley with a prisoner and a rebel.

Imogen, who now felt herself cut off from every species of communication,, obliged to stifle every emotion of anxiety, suspense, and curiosity, turned back desponding; and measured the limits of her little prison w ith a quick and uneven step that betrayed the perturbation of her mind, and the variety of agonizing reflections that w'earied it. The uncertainty of her own fate, the still-stronger apprehensions she entertained for that of lier father, gave rise to a train of painful cogitations, which the high colouring of imagination exaggerated beyond every power of patient endurance To the agony of her mind was added no inconsiderable degree of bodily pain; and she had suffered so much from heat and thirst, that, totally overcome, she was on the point of falling to the earth, when she observed a small jar of fresh.

ST. DOMINICK.

1 IT

water lying near her. She eagerly seized and carried it to her parched lips, and felt as if she inhaled a new sense of existence with the refreshing draught. As she laid down the vessel, her eye glanced on the mirror : she shuddered as she contemplated the figure it reflected to her gaze. Her long hair loose and dishevelled hung wildly over her neck and shoulders; the ashy hue of death paled her cheek, whose whiteness was rendered more conspicuous from the crimson drops that stained it; while her outer garment, torn and disfigured, but ill concealed the page’s light garb she wore beneath it.

Struck with horror at her own ghastly and singular appearance, she bathed her face with what water was left, disentangled her tresses, and bound them round her head, and disencumbered herself from the torn fragments of her upper garment. Revived by this little personal attention, she continued with renovated strength to pursue her locomotive reflections till the darkness of night hung over the camp;

THE NOVICE OF

then overcome with bodily pain, and wearied by those con diets of mind,, the struggles of her hopes and apprehensions, and her doubts and fears, awakened, she flung herself on the mattress, and exhausted nature bowed to the soft influence of obliviating rest.

CHAP. XVI.

Vi conosco amate stelle A quei palpiti d’amore Che svcgliate nel mio sen,

Non m’inganno; siete quelle N’ho l’immagine nel core,

Ne sareste cosi belle Se non foste del mio ben’.

Metastasio.

THAT restoration, which ever attends on the repose of innocence, shed its balm on the wounded mind, the debilitated frame, of Imogen, and, [united with the native excellence of her constitution to breathe renovation on every sense, and restore that elasticity of spirits which

ST. DOMINICK.

119

with the young and sanguine suffers but a temporary suspension. The morning’s cheery light seemed to dispel the gloomy visions of her mind, with an effect similar to that produced by its return on the natural world; and the sun, as it shone through the curtain entrance of the tent, kissed with its warm beam a cheek on whose polished surface the rose of health again faintly blushed its return. Her mind, restored in some degree to its strength of tone, busied itself in separating her ideas from the confusion which amazement, recent horror, and overwhelming emotion, were calculated to inspire; and hope reillumined its vestal flame in a bosom where nature seemed determined despair should ever despair of seizing ; for it was a bosom organized for the reception of every sweet and joyous feeling, and glowing with that genial warmth which nourishes every germ of happiness to maturity, and considers even the cloud of affliction as the transient precursor of future bliss.

120

THE NOVICE OF

Imogen had scarcely risen from her pillow,, when the sentinel who patrolled before the tent looked in upon her. She observed her guard had been changed during the night, and from the countenance of the soldier she believed the change would be in her favour ; or probably she was disposed to see every thing in a more grateful light than the preceding evening.

“ Ah, my young sir knight !” exclaimed the sentinel as she approached him :	why

“ truly, if sleep were a banquet, thou hast fared rarely ; for I have watched thee “ since the first cock crew, and by my ee holy rood thou hast slept it out like a “ prince. I warrant thee, thou art ready rf for a slice of our black bread, and a <e pipkin of Rhenish wine would not long “ lie in thy way. Well, thou look'st a “ puny little soul, and thou shalt share my mess willingly : for else till the mid-“ day watch is relieved thy appetite must “ keep cool.”

Imogen, with all that ardor of hope so

ST. DOMINICK.

121

easily awakened in the heart of the young and unhappy, fancied she read in the apparent courtesy of her guard a prelude to more material services. “ I am most ‘f grateful to thee, my good friend/' said she, for thy kind offer, though I feel no “ inclination at present to avail myself of “ it; yet it emboldens me to consider thee “ as one who in compassionating my situa-“ tion may be inclined to relieve it.’'

“ Thou art right,” said the soldier bluntly; “ as far as pitying thee and sharing “ my mess with thee goes, I am thy man.” “ And no more?” demanded Imogen despondingly.

“ Thou darest not ask more,” returned the sentinel: “for, though thou art thy-ee self a little traitor to thy king, thou “ darest not tamper with the fidelity of a “ soldier who has the honour to serve un-44 der him, and the grace to love him next “ to his heavenly commander.”

Imogen, who, though she severely felt the disappointment of her vague and san-VOL. II.	f

122

THE NOVICE OF

guine expectations in the stern fidelity of her guard, yet, with the liberality of a superior mind, reverenced that virtue by which she was a sufferer.

“ I do not wish to corrupt thy honour,” said she, “ but to interest thy compassion. (C 1 am not so ignorant as to believe my cc escape from hence could be practicable: f<r nor probably, could it be effected, would “ it avail me,” she added with a sigh. “ Ignorant of the laws of war, I would ‘f know the destiny that awaits me ; I ff would inquire whether there was a pos-tf sibility of acquainting my friends that I cf live and am a prisoner?

The soldier, looking on her with a countenance in which duty and compassion evidently struggled, returned : “ I have iC already trespassed on my orders by thus £t Jong holding parley with thee. I can *f only tell thee thou art in noble hands, for thou art the prisoner of the baron “ de Montar gis.”

Death seemed to have hung his chillest

ST. DOMINICK.

123

icicles on the heart of Imogen, as she faintly repeated, The baron de Mon-" targis !”

The sentinel returned to his station.

Imogen no longer walked with hurried step under the agitating influence of suspense. She had now every thing to fear, and nothing to hope. In an attidude of despondence she seated herself on the side of her mattress : her countenance, her whole figure, betrayed the silent torpor of despair !

From this state of sullen inanity she was awakened by a guard, under the command of the serjeant she had seen the night before, who ordered her to arise and accompany them.

"Whither?” faintly demanded Imogen.

To the baron de Mon targis,” retorted the serjeant.

“ O God !” exclaimed Imogen impulsively, and wringing her hands, while tears filled her eyes, " ’tis impossible ! I cannot,

124

THE NOVICE OV

“ will not, go a prisoner into the presence cr of a Montargis !”

“No!” returned the serjeant; then, “ by my holy dame, we will assist thee. “ Soldiers, do your duty.”

“ Lead on then !” said Imogen firmly, and disengaging herself from the grasp of her guards.

The fire which had warmed the souls of her illustrious ancestors seemed suddenly to spread its flame through her sinking-heart; the pure and noble blood that filled her veins flowed with quicker circulation ; the tear dried in her indignant eye; her sou! was resolved. The last descendant of the house of St Dorval, (hough a woman, disdained to shrink from the presence of a baron de Montargis. The timidity of her nature gave way to its pride: “ Lead “ on !” said she firmly to the soldiers ; and, surrounded by her guard, was conducted through a considerable part of the camp to the tent of the baron de Montargis. The rich scarlet drapery which shaded

ST. DOMINICK.

125

ils entrance, the banners that waved over its summit, spoke the military consequence of its owner. Though large, it M as wholly occupied by a crowd that waited the orders of the baron, who had that day been appointed colonel of the king's life-guards; and Imogen and her guards were detained for a considerable time at the entrance, while behind their robust and brawny forms the timid prisoner sheltered herself from the gaze of the passing multitude. The crowd gradually dispersed ; and, only attended by the serjeant, she was ordered to advance. The baron de Montargis was writing at a small table : a cloke of purple velvet, thrown back from the shoulders, discovered the brilliant polish of his shining breast-plate, and fell in rich and graceful folds to the ground ; the dark plumage of his helmet shaded his face and added to the height of a form majestically lofty, even though half-recumbent; while a young page tottered beneath the weight of his cuirasses and sword, of which

126

THE NOVICE OF

lie seemed just to have disengaged himself. As the profile of his figure was only visible, Imogen raised her eyes to its contemplation: then, letting them fall to the earth, and folding her arms, stood in proud and silent expectation of the result of this extraordinary interview. No tear dewed the feverish blush that burnt on her cheek ; no sigh of apprehension died on her lip ; the heroism of pride and sensibility was now wound up in the bosom of St. Dorval’s daughter to its last strained pitch ; a word, a breath, a thought, would have been sufficient to destroy it.

“ May it please you, monseigneur,” said the serjeant, stepping up to the baron with an air meanly servile, the prisoner fC you condescended to express some inte-“ rest in, has, through my interference, ff been treated with every mark of respect, “ and now awaits your good leisure.”

The serjeant drew back, the baron flung down his pen, turned round, and having for a moment regarded the half-averted

ST. DOMIXICK.

127

form of Imogen, said to the serjeant: “ I <f thank you for your attention to my ft wishes ; it shall not go unrewarded : but “ you may retire for the present ; I would “ speak to this youth alone.” The serjeant obeyed.

“ Speak,” continued the baron, addressing Imogen, "young and daring stranger, who, thus habited in the garb of peace, “ hast braved the battle’s fiercest rage, and " wooing danger in its most dreadful form, “ didst rush between the suspended sword of death and the prostrate form of the count St. Dorval.”

The baron ceased to speak ; but no dauntless reply, consonant to the heroism he alluded to, answered the interrogation, Imogen raised her drooping head, yet with difficulty raised it ; the fire of her eye was extinguished on the snowy surface of her cheek ; no vagrant tint betrayed the vital warmth of life 3 her hand, pressed on her bosom, seemed to heave with the palpitation of her heart ; her lips, the fair rivals

128

THE NOVICE OF

of her bloodless cheeky quivered with a broken sigh ; and while a glance, doubtful, tender, languid, and retiring, beamed from beneath the shadow of her half-raised eye-lash, panting, faint, and trembling, she appeared like a beautiful personification of “ Echo in love’s soft sadness pining into air.” The baron arose; advanced humanely towards his now almost-lifeless prisoner: his eye of fire rolled in silence over a form touched with no mortal interest; his heart’s sanguine tide rushed over his manly cheek, deserted again to his heart, again crimsoned his face, and the power of articulation at last returned to lips that faintly, tremblingly ejaculated, “ Heavenly powers! the novice of St. Do-“ minick.”

ff The minstrel of Provence !” inarticulately returned Imogen, and clung for support to the pillar against which she leaned.

ff Then I am not deceived,” said the baron, supporting her in his arms, and

ST. DOMINICK.

129

clasping her trembling’hand in his; “this €S form is no illusion conjured by my oft-<f deluding fancy, to cheat the wishes of <f my heart into transient bliss; for oh! “ this hand, this precious hand, which “ communicates in its touch a kindred " throb to the wild pulsations of mine ; tf that glance which plays upon my heart’s " finest nerve, and restores it to that soft “ vibration Imogen’s eyes first awakened; ct tells me, though thus disguised, though “ thus so unexpectedly found, that thou “ art indeed that Imogen who, in days *6 precious to the dearest recollection of “ memory, shed love’s vital beam upon “ the kindling soul of the wandering visi-“ tant of Montmorell.’’

A thousand hearts swelled in the bosom of Imogen, whose trembling form still depended on the encircling arm of the baron for support. The resentment of slighted love, the tender effusions of awakened passion, the amazement natural to a discovery so far beyond the limits of proba-

130

THE NOVICE OF

bility, the fondness of the mistress, the sensitive delicacy of the woman, the humiliating' feelings of the prisoner, and the inborn pride of the heiress of the count de St. Dorval, the hereditary enemy of a Montargis, already struggled in her breast. The baron’s ardent gaze, the too close pressure of his embrace, gave to pride and delicacy the sole empire over her tumultous sensations. With an air firm and dignified, she withdrew herself from his arms ; the truant colour of her cheek again suffused its paleness even to the deepest tint of crimson ; the kindling spirit of her mind reanimated her languid eyes: she retreated a few steps, then modestly but Avithout perturbation replied :—ff It is true, f£ sir, I am that person, who, when some <f months back you sought an asylum in the chateau de Montmorell under the as-ff sumed character of a minstrel, held a <f temporary station in the household of its lady. I am now your prisoner; and you are, I am told, the baron de Montargis,

ST. DOMINICK.	131

ce to whose human interference I owe my " life.’'

The baron started : the air, the manner, the words, of Imogen froze the tide of passion that a moment before rolled tumultuously in his veins: he gazed on her in silent wonder; a new recollection seemed to break upon his mind ; his colour changed, he advanced, drew a seat towards Imogen, which her weakness rendered acceptable; then, pacing the tent with hasty strides, after an uninterrupted pause of some minutes, he seated himself near her, and with a long drawn sigh ex-

3	o	o

claimed, “ Lady, in the sudden, the over-“ whelming emotions thy most unexpected and too welcome appearance excited, (<r the past, the present, and the future, were equally absorbed. I beheld thee ; <f again beheld thee; that rapturous con-“ victicm filled my whole soul, and my “ heart was accessible to every other “ thought : but even my impetuous feel-“ ings bow to the supremacy of thy power ;

132

THE NOVICE OF

iC it was for thee only to rouse those <c powerful emotions, which but a moment hack bewildered iny senses in the trance ie of rapture ; it is for thee only to subdue them. We have indeed both changed characters since we last met: I left thee, <f lady, the gentle novice of St. Domi-“ nick, the fair representative of cloistral “ gloom : timidly gay and bashfully wise, thy genius, like the purest ore im-mersed in debased crystalline, shone ft through the gloom of thy rigid destiny ; <e while thy modest nature shrunk from “ betraying those intellectual perfections “ which concealed their splendor beneath “the rethink graces of woman’s witching:

o o	O

“softness. I found thee (yes, lady, that “ air of cold reserve assists my truant re-“ collection)—I found thee amidst the “ tumult and carnage of a field of battle, “ foremost in the career of danger, op-“ posing that delicate form with Amazo-“ nian boldness to the fury of the fight, “ and, with arms formed in the symmetry

ST. DOMINICK.

13S

“ of love’s softest mould, shielding the “ prostrate count de St. Dorval from in-“ stant death, and saving his life even at the risk of thine own !” fe And did I save it ?” eagerly demanded the weeping Imogen; whole feelings, worked up to the last excess of emotion, needed but the sound of her father’s name wholly to overpower them : 4< and has the " count de St. Dorval preserved his liberty *' with his life ?”

“ He received both, lady, from me,” replied the baron haughtily, but with uncontrolled emotion.

Then for that one act,” said Imogen, throwing herself at his feet, and bathing his hands with her tears, " may heaven shower its choicest blessings on you ! In “ saving his life you have not saved his f‘only; in securing his liberty you have ‘f restored me to mine.”

The baron was overpowered: almost ready to sink beside Imogen, he with difficulty raised her; and snatching his hand

THE NOVICE OF

m

from the soft grasp of hers, “Go!” said he, “ too dangerous even in that sensibility “ another excites. I lack not thy grati-“ tude, nor his for whose sake only it (i flows ; nay, I deserve it not. Fate placed “ a noble triumph in my hands, nor did I “ suffer it to escape. My house’s deadliest <f foe, the count St. Dorval, lay at my “ mercy; and thinkest thou with this no “ common enemy I would have played a “ common part ? No ; I rescued him from “ the power of those with whom he vainly “ struggled for life, placed him on my “ own horse, gave him in care to his rc squire, who supported him in his arms,, “nor even deigned to tell him it was thus “a Montargis triumphed over his enemies t “ It was thus I revenged myself on the “ man whom it was my inheritance to “ hate, who tore from my father’s heart <( his blooming bride even at the altars “ step, whom from my cradle I have been “ taught as a rebel to oppose, as a bigot “ to detest, as an enemy to despise I’*

ST. DOMINICK.

135

ftf No, my lord,” interrupted Imogen indignantly, you do not hate, you can-not despise, the count St. Dorval ; that cl sympathy which exists between the vir-“ tuous of every rank, of every persuasion, u forbids it. It is the narrow suggestions of early-imbibed prejudices that veil your “ better reason, and make you behold cc errors in the character of your enemy which exist but in the distempered bias “ of your own imagination. All noble “ as is the count de St. Dorval, he is still less illustrious by his birth than by his f< virtues; even his errors are respectable, since they flow from a mistaken sense of cf right : his political and religious senti-“ ments, which subject him to the odium of rebellion and bigotry, are the prin-" ciples of his inheritance, not of his con-ft viction ; and the loyalty and toleration “ of the baron de Montargis are probabiy 6C but offsprings of the same growth. It “ is the motive, and not the act, by which f‘ we are to be judged; and while the

136

THE NOVICE OF

“ heart remains untainted, the aberrations “ of the mind are rather to be pitied than “ condemned.”

The emotions which betrayed themselves in the countenance of the baron, as he listened to his prisoner spoke an agitation of mind that baffled expression; then, while with impass oned admiration he gazed on her countenance, over v' hich a kindling animation gradually diffused its fire as she spoke, he exclaimed:	Enviable	St. Dor-

cc val ! to be defended by such arms as those, to be vindicated by such lips! f< Oh ! to what spell of magic dost thou Cf owe thy power over the heart of he?' who 41 has burst the strict barrier of female delicacy, and in unseeming habit fol-“ lowed thee even amidst the battle’s “ wildest fury ; who has overcome her “ sex’s softness, and braved that death she “ feared for thee alone; and who now, “ even in the power of thy foe, boldly “ vindicates thy errors, and with love’s true sophistry converts thy very failings

ST. DOMINICK.

137

“ into virtues ? Yes, thou shalt owe me a second life, more precious than the ff first : thy mistress, thy imprudent ten-der mistress, shall be restored to thee. Haply thy claims are prior to those my u heart once made, and hers, O sweet “ deception! appeared to sanction/'

Tears of wounded pride, of shame, of insulted modesty, stole over the deep-tinted cheek of the prisoner; and, hurried away by the violence of her indignant emotion, she faintly replied, Had I a thou-“ sand lives, they were too few to sacrifice “ for the preservation of count St. Dor-“ val, for he is—my father !”

Your father !” repeated the baron, in the hurried accents of amazement :	Gra-

“ cious God ! Imogen the daughter of St. " Dorval ! O Imogen ! extraordinary “ and mysterious being! who in every situation, under every varying aspect, “ still bearest about thee that light of su-ff periority which encompasses thee like a ff glory, who still awakenest interest and

THE NOVICE OF

“ excitest amazement, speak ! by that " beam of truth that shines in the candour “ of thine eye, and mingles with the per-“ suasive graces of thy lip, I conjure thee Cf say who and what art thou ? why comest thou here? why wearest thou this dis-“ guise ? why art thou, erewhile the timid “ novice of St. Dominick, wasting thy “ sweetness amidst the gloom of cloistral “ privacy, and now the daughter of the “ count St. Dorval, the heroine of an army? Oh ! why must the eager heart wait upon the pleasure of cold detail to tx satisfy its longings ? why does it not ec possess the intuitive power of piercing the veil of mystery which enshrouds <r the fate of its object? why in the elo-quent eyes of Imogen cannot Monlargis ce read all his soul languishes to know, but tf which the wounded, the offended deli-cacy of St, Dorval’s daughter may in-" dignantly refuse to his entreaties ?” r‘ Then you are,” said Imogen in a tremulous voice, recollecting her father’s last

ST. DOMINICK

139

command, “ the son of the baron de Mon-“ tarais?”

“ I am the son of him who was the ba-ron de Montargis, who is by the king’s “ royal pleasure the duke de Beauvilliers. flf Yet, O my sweet enemy! forget that I am so ; still behold at your feet the “ humble minstrel of Provence, as when “ in those stolen and delicious hours of “ transient bliss he breathed upon this fair ,r hand the secret sigh of his soul; still “ behold me with those partial eyes, whose thrilling glances sunk deep to my heart, and waked its every pulse to trans-“ port’s liveliest throb.”

The warm tide of reviving tenderness rushed o’er the kindling soul of Imogen. She beheld at her feet the object of that romantic faithful passion whose treasured idea, twined round every finer fibre of her heart, had long been the source of all her joy, the dream of her rest, the subject of her waking thought ; whom again to behold under many a deceptive plea, hope

MO

THE NOVICE OF

had lured her from the seclusion of her youth ; whom, now beholding, appeared to her enamoured eye adorned with all those great and noble graces the humility of his former disguise had concealed from her view: a youthful and illustrious warrior, in whose eye the flame of valour beamed, on whose lip the fire of genius and passion breathed. The haughtiness which dignified her manners was lied, the spirit which animated her countenance was extinct; the deep scarlet flush with which pride, wounded and indignant, coloured her cheek, faded to the rosy su (fusion of tenderpess chastened by modesty. Soft was the languor of her eye, and a thousand timid, tender, bashful, graces insinuated themselves into her air, her attitude, her voice, as she requested the baron to rise. The smile which accompanied the request was omnipotent.

The baron obeyed, and, encouraged by its sweetness, repeated his petition, nor petitioned in vain. Imogen, anxious to

ST. DOMINICK.

141

relate as be was to hear every thing that could remove the faintest suspicion inimical to the delicacy of her character, the refinement of her feelings, or the propriety of her conduct, entered with brief simplicity into the recent particulars of her life. A rosy confusion, a blushing earnestness, veiled at first those graces of recitation with which nature had eminently endowed her 3 but as these soft effusions of bashfulness gradually vanished to the increasing interest of her story, as she related the interview with her father, touched on the circumstances of his life, and dwelt on that affecting moment which restored her to a parent, the pathos, the energy of her natural and feeling eloquence, rose with the importance of her subject; while an unconscious sigh, a transient blush, a starting tear, betrayed the profound emotion of her sensible heart, and gave a higher finish to her detail than even the most brilliant figures of rhetoric could have bestowed. In slightly referring to

142

THE NOVICE OF

the history of her father’s life, she was unavoidably obliged to touch on the enmity which had so long subsisted between the houses of Montargis and de St. Dorval -, yet she did it with a delicacy, an emotion, that evinced the deep regret it inspired in a heart which now more than ever lamented the dreadful effects of political and religious dissension.

While she spoke, the baron hung over her enamoured; when she ceased, his eager eye still dwelt on the charms of her expressive countenance, his eager attention still hung upon the melody of her accents : he had given her sigh for sigh and tear for tear, and the silence which succeeded to her relation was the eloquence of a soul too much agitated by contending passions to commit the expression of its feelings to the inadequate power of language.

While still he gazed in silent emotion on the interesting daughter of his enemy, her cheek grew pale, her head drooped.

ST. DOMINICK.

145

her eye became dim, her lips quivered ; the trembling and extended arms of the baron prevented her falling to the earth. The extreme fatigue she had undergone, the anxiety and violent perturbation which had agitated her mind, the pain of her slight wound, which now bled afresh, together with having tasted only a draught of water for more than thirty hours, and being wholly exhausted by the late extraordinary occurrence and the long narrative she had entered on, occasioned a weakness which she had felt stealing over her frame, and vainly endeavoured to conquer. An exclamation of horror and amazement burst from the lips of the baron as the bandage which bound her arm gave way, and the blood flowed copiously from the ill-dressed scar. Imogen, though faint, was not insensible ; she endeavoured to assure him the wound was but slight. The baron tore off his scarf, bound it round her arm, and placed her an a couch -, then administering some drops that lay on the

144

THE NOVICE OF

table, and which seemed to revive his languid captive, he rushed out of the tent.

In a few minutes he returned, accompanied by the surgeon who the night before had deemed the wound of the humble prisoner too inconsequent for his attention. The whole nomenclature of the materia medica was now ransacked for technical terms to express its nature and magnitude: fawning obsequiousness lurked in every line of his countenance, and even his habitual and professional formality gave way to the impetuous and anxious impatience of the baron. As it was necessary the arm of the patient should be stripped, the baron retired; and while the surgeon examined and dressed the wound, he threw out some hints, in the most respectful manner, that, from the violent anxiety testified by the baron de Montar-gis, his patient must be of high rank, and constantly addressed her by the title of madame. Meanwhile two women of decent appearance entered the tent ; the one

ST. DOMINICK.

145

held a bundle of female clothes, the other assisted the surgeon, who retired with a thousand apologies for having mistaken his noble patient fora prisoner of no consequence the preceding night in the hospital-tent; while Imogen, as much disgusted with his time-serving meanness as she had been with his inhumanity, was equally glad to see him depart, and to find herself once more in female society.

Her woman’s heart rejoiced in this restoration to an intercourse with her own sex, even of an inferior species ; and in their countenances she thought she read those generic signs of the female character, softness and humanity, which perhaps only existed in the comparison she drew between their countenances and those of the warrior tribe by whom she had been lately surrounded. They civilly informed Imogen the^ had been sent to wait on her by his excellency the baron de Montargis ; and conducted her to the interior apartment of the tent, which by its furniture

VOL. II.

G

146

THE NOVICE OF

seemed appropriate to repose. Here they spread out the little wardrobe: it was the simple garb of a French paysanne. Imogen, delighted by this delicate mark of attention in her amiable conqueror, exclaimed: ff This is an indulgence indeed !” and eagerly began to disencumber herself of her masculine attire, in which she had suffered some of modesty’s most painful throes ; while her delicacy triumphed that she had divested herself of the minstrel robe which she had so long cherished as a precious relic, and which might have intimated some fond truths to its former owner, more flattering to his vanity than to her pride. 4

“Yes, lady,” said the woman, in answer to her exclamation, “ you must doubtless “ be happy to fling off your doublet and “ hose, as I once was when I followed my “ husband to the siege of Rouen in a sol-“ dier’s garb, for all the women were for-“ bid the camp ; and beshrew me, you are “ in luck to get even such a dress as this.

srr. DOMINICK.

147

“■ for we soldiers’ wives generally pack up ^ our whole wardrobes in our husbands’ €< knapsacks. My good man/’ she con-tinned, assisting Imogen in the duties of the toilet, €t when he was last gcouring <f the country, took this habit from a sim-ff pie hind, who swore by the saints it was “ a wedding garb for his lady mistress. “ Our Lady pardon my husband ! say 1 ; “ but then he swore that the hind looked (l like a papist and a Leaguer, and so he “ took three marks from him into the bar-" gain.”

O	X

Habited in a boddice and skirt of coarse texture but snowy hue, her luxuriant hair fastened up to the back of her head with a silken band of dark-green, and playing over her temples in negligent disorder, Imogen contemplated the form the mirror reflected with a satisfaction that flushed her cheek, while a ely thought of self-“ approving beauty” stole on her gaze. The women, for whose attentions she was gratefully thankful, retired ; and she re-

liS	THE	NOVICE	Of

turned to the apartment she had before occupied, where she found a page in waiting, and a collation spread with fairy elegance. Notwithstanding her long-enforced abstinence, she ate sparingly : the strong and still turbulent emotions of her heart “ subdued all feeling else save what “ beat there;” and while her mind had food for meditation” even to excess, she seemed almost unconscious of the want of grosser nourishment: yet the little she did eat refreshed and revived her; and having dismissed the page, she withdrew from the lable, fell prostrate to the earth, and in the attitude of pious humility raised a heart still humbler in gratitude to the Author of all good, to whose providential care she owed the preservation of her father’s life and liberty, her own present safety, and that (low of happiness which now succeeded to the load of anxiety and misery she had lately sustained.

Imogen had scarcely risen from her knees, and “ the beauty of holiness" still

ST. DOMINICK.

149

shed its seraph expression on her countenance, when the baron entered. The nymph-like simplicity of her attire presented to his admiring eye such a form as poetical fancy attaches to the idea of Arcadian beauty.

" How much, my lord,” said Imogen, " do I owe you for an attention so deli-“ cate, so grateful ?” casting her eyes over the dress his kindness had provided her, then modestly raising their grateful glances to his,

The baron took her hand, and, seating himself beside her, said : " You mistake, <rf lady ; to me you owe noting, 1 can <f only claim the merit of construing your “ blushes into their literal sense : they are “ ever the eloquence, the rhetoric, which <f modesty deigns only to use ; and the “ glow which delicate shame suffuses over “ the cheek of lovely woman is the sacred “ sign of vestal purity, which no man de-“ seiving* the name will dare to violate. “ Trust me, sweet lady, lam most pleased

THE NOVICE OF

“ that our rude camp could a fiord thee ff even this garb, though more suited to (< the chaste simplicity of thy taste than to “ the lustre of thy rank: but nature has stampt her letters patent of nobility on thy soul, and in the elevation of those ff sentiments which gives to thy air and “ countenance their noblest expression ; tf nor could the shining diadem nor er-" mined robe of peerage add a greater “ splendor to the form which the divine “ light of virtue and the heaven-9tolert “ beam of genius irradiates! No, to the “ eye of Montargis, the lady de St* Dor-rf val is not more dignified, more illustri-‘r ous than the meek and humble novice of St. Dominick.*' Then in a tone more tenderly familiar he added: “ Oh! at the sound of that name, memory like light-“ ning shoots athwart each interval of “ bliss, and my raptured senses doubt their fC fidelity as I gaze on the form of her “ whom once to have known is never to <f forget !”

ST. DOMINICK.

151

" Never to forget !’* repeated Imogen, with a smile half reproachful : " Oh, my "lord! had not this strange adventure “ awakened recollection, memory had soon " resigned the last fading remembrance of " the novice of St. Dominick. Whate’er “ the wayward destiny which led you to " seek an asylum in humble guise within " the chateau de Montmorell, whether the “ romantic spirit of adventure or the wild “ vicissitudes of war, unvanquished by that " destiny, you ever rendered it subservient "to the purposes of the moment: you " stooped to assimilate yourself to those " you might have awed into conscious in-“ feriority; and your mind, like gold, “ which dissolving into baser metal blends " itself with each minuter particle, yet " still retains its own pure quality unai-" loyed, ductile but undegraded, betrayed “ itself well-versed in the world’s subti-“ lizing school. Cheating time where you " could not enjoy it, o’er the dreary path “ of solitude and unvaried sequestration

152

T*in NOVICE OP

you scattered those flowers of dalliance cf which faded as they fell. Such, my lord, rr were your passing* courtesies considered : sweet, perhaps, but not permanent) grateful, but transient.”

The rt eloquent blood” of Imogen ever betrayed the emotion which dictated the sentiment of her eloquent lips : the oblique reference to those tender professions of the baron which his after-neglect had proved to be fleeting as the sighs which had stolen amidst their honied words,” rosed the cheek of Imogen with “ the virgin crim-son of modesty” and the deeper flush of pride; while the faint smile which hung upon the pensive softness of the baron’s ardent gaze, seemed to owe its existence to that pleasure awakened by a reproach which a tender but wounded interest only could have excited.

f< Yes,” said he, “ if I am to be ar-iC raigned on the allegation of appearances, “ I must indeed seem what you infer I am, “ the mere wonlling, whose heart, seeking

ST. DOMINICK

153

only temporary gratification, like the “ inconstant surface of a mirror, receives te every impression but retains none. Yet <f since you have honoured me in the faint ({ recollection of those vows which breath-ff ed the passion of a soul devoted with all “ its energies to adore thee, and registered “ in the face of heaven upon the hand of (( her whose purity is heaven’s type, deem ff me not, sweet saint, in love a truant: “ but trust me that as the rose’s essence precedes and e’en survives its own iden-ff tical and fair existence, so ere I beheld (C thee I nourished in my bosom’s core a germ of love for thee, reserved to ripen to perfection ; and if it drooped beneath ff the chill of absence most enforced, be-ff lieve me that again at sight of thee it blooms, and sheds a fresher odour than " when first thy genial influence flushed “ on its primary nature. And now, while ,f in return for thy sweetly interesting and “ candid detail I pour the boundless con-“ fidence of a soldier’s honest and un-g 2

154

THE NOVICE OF

practised heart into thine, wilt thou, ff fair maid, in pity to that heart’s weak-“ ness, still suffer me to consider my love-“ Iy auditress in the light in which I first “ beheld her, the meek novice of St. Do-minick, not the overawing and illuslri-“ ous lady de St. Dorval ? O Imogen! ec the recollection of the former character “ will ever awaken the nerve where bliss <f is bred, while the latter—God of heaven ! “ the daughter of St. Dorval!—O for-tune! why art thou still of love the un-(i vanquishable enemy? and thou, O lovo, ff why dost thou twine around the heart those ties which breaking break it, yet ff twine them only for the finger of destiny ff to verse? But away with reflection ! this “ hour shall be the commemorating æra of love’s sweet birth ; the expanded “ wing of joy shall soar in triumph, and 11 guard the heart from care’s intrusive cc gloom; and the sad realities of a fatal “ conviction shall lie subdued by the rosy “ influence of sweet illusion : fancy’s fairy

ST. DOMINICK.

155

tc spell shall convert this warlike shelter “ into the dearly-remembered gallery of el Montmorell, and the dignity of a peer-“ ess of France into the soul-dissolving ,f softness of the tender pitying Imogen ; “ who hung, not unmoved, upon the min-“ strel's last-breathed vow, and whose eyes (f dropped precious dew the jealousy of “ love would have wrested from compas-sion, but that its insuperable fears for-bade the temerity of the golden hope.’’ Then, after a pause, the baron, casting down his eyes with that air of modesty which seemed to reprehend the necessity which obliged him to become the hero of his own tale, continued : “ He who is bom “ the favourite of fortune, who lisps his “ first accént in the bosom of indepen-“ dence, and is endowed with the com-“ mand over others before he has been “ taught the necessity of obtaining it over “ himself, enters life on its most level “ path, and cannot be supposed to meet f< with those incidents with which the vicis-

TH-E NOVICE OF

“ situdes of a less smiling destiny abound ; te which give interest to detail, render ego-ei tism venial, and furnish the historian with his most attractive facts, the poet “ with his brightest images. Rank and fortune were my birth-right. I was born to that which is the aim and object f{ of mankind to obtain ; for which every “ energy of the soul, every faculty of the “ mind, rushes into exertion : I was born c< to it; and those difficulties, those ener-el gies, which might have enabled me to ee have acquired them, lay dormant, in “ the want of that necessity which is the primary stimulus of all human action. “ When consciousness first awakened in “ my infant mind, it found me reposing ff on the bosom of beauty : my eyes, from their first discriminating glance, dwelt “ on the loveliness and harmony of nature ct in the fairest epitome of her works, wro-" man ! Nourished on her smiles, over-whelmed by her caresses, sporting in her “ arms, catching my lisping accents from

ST. DOMINICK.

157

“ her lip of love, my soul received its first u impression from the purity, the 6ub-“ limity of hers ; ancl what it still pos-ff sesses of good is but the lingering trace of that sweet and indelible impression. “ Julia deRibemont resided in my grand-“ father’s family during my mother’s life. “ The long-declining health of that mo-ther gave me constantly to the arms of “ her beautiful friend ; who, on my pa-“ rent’s death, adopted me the child of “ her affection, while my father returned “ the kindness even by making her the “ idol of his own. But—”

The baron paused ; his brow insensibly lost its mild expansion, and contracted its shade over his darkening eye ; and, after a moment’s struggle, he resumed:	But

<f my father was deprived of this object of ff his homage, and I lost my amiable mo-" ther: she was destined to boast a more “ illustrious title—to become the mother ft of Imogen. I was but five years of age when I participated in my father’s still-

THE NOVICE OF

C( lamented loss ; and memory goes no <c further than the thrilling recollection <e of the feelings the insinuating Julia awa-€i kened in my young heart ; the tears, the “ lamentations, with which I pursued her €( flight ; or the hatred 1 conceived against him, who I was soon taught to know had torn her from me. Oh ! you to “ whom the education, the forming of “ youthful minds is consigned, tremble at ff the great, the solemn charge you un-cc dertake ! 'Tis you who fix that radical c‘ impression from whence those innume-“ rable branches emerge, whose closely-“ knit associations become the efficient C( source of all their virtues, of all their i( vices! If you would participate in the reward of the former, for the latter you are wholly accountable. The stream of time flows in vain over those traces “ stampton the youthful heart, interwoven “ with its flexible fibres ; its soft oblivia-ting tide does but ameliorate, but cannot “ deface. In riper years, when my fa-

ST. DOMINICK.

159

“ ther spoke of the hereditary feuds of the ce houses de Montargis and de St. Dorval, “ he would add., f And ’twas this man who robbed me of my bride, who deprived “ thy infant and motherless years of that cf miJd guardian spirit which hovered a-“ round tliee with more than a mother’s “ tenderness.’ Oh ! that recollection thus “ revived breathed a deathless spirit on “ the spark of discord illumined in my f< youthful heart 1”

‘f A deathless spirit!” instinctively repeated Imogen ; fs Oh, not a deathless spirit !” looking with a mild and deprecating glance in the face of the baron.

The blush which flitted over the cheek of the baron drew its source from the delicacy he felt he had violated. Avoiding the soft but earnest looks of Imogen, he replied: ffI speak, lady, under the in-“ fluence of my then existing feelings, “ which at that period stole their predo-,f minant hue from the colour of their if opinions by whom 1 was surrounded.

THE NOVICE OF

ec But to be brief. The activity of my father’s mind, his long initiation in all “ the profoundest mysteries of politics, carried him to Paris; and holding two high stations at court successively under “ the two brothers, Charles the Ninth and Henry the Third, he seldom visited his “ provincial estates, but left me to be cdu-sr cated at the chateau de Montargis, and “ to win back that popularity his Iongab-“ sence might eventually forfeit. Placed iC under the care of a rigid disciple of Luther, and who had been in his youth the friend of that extraordinary reformer, the harshness of my preceptor’s mind “ communicated its chill severity to his Cf taste, and the studies selected for my pursuit were as dissonant to the native “ tone of my mind, as the disposition and c( sentiments of mv tutor to the feelings

~	O

of my heart, or the gay hilarity of my tc temper. Me had borne a conspicuous fC part in those violent controversial strug-ci gles which so long tore and disgraced

ST. DOMINICK.

161

" the Christian church ; and his success “ had awakened in his mind an ardent “ passion for subtle argumentation, a love “ for whatever was difficult to be under-stood, and an ambition to be supposed ‘f capable of comprehending what was in “ itself unintelligible, which induced him “ to confine my studies to those works he “ himself approved—thesubtleties of Aris-'* totle’s philosophy, or the uninteresting “ and gladiatorial disputes of modern theo-“ logists. The play which such works if gave to boyish ingenuity at first fasci-nated my attention, and I became as " bigoted and pedantic as my tutor could “ desire: but, as the light of reason dif-“ fused its influence o’er my faculties, as “ the latent perceptions of taste awakened “ into refinement, as passion’s genial glow “shed its influence o’er my heart and “ senses, I turned revoltingly from the “ crude regimen prescribed to my eager u mind. A sentiment will be easier con-“ verted into its opposite, than moderated

1Ô2

THE NOVICE OF

“ or restrained into an intermediate degree “ between the great extremes ; and dis-“ gust soon pursued the recollection of those studies which Iliad once engaged “ in with avidity. The authors of the f‘ Augustan day, the elegant poets of mo-“ dern Italy, succeeded to the philosophy <f of Aristotle, the theology of Melanc-4f thon. I studied the musical systems of “ Gui d’Arezzo, Jean de Muria, and the “ more famed theorists of a latter day.— “ The works of the celebrated trouba-“ dours, Pierre Bidal and Arnaud de Var-tc vail,* fell into my hands. I studied-<f the Provençal dialect, and recollected I ff inhaled that air which was once sup-c< posed to breathe inspiration. The “ streams of my native Durance assumed (t a new and classic interest, and I vvan-“ dered in poetictransport along the banks of that delicious river, o’er whose swell-

* See a history of the Troubadours, by M. de St. P^laie, finished by the abbé Mtllot.

ST. DOMINICK.

163

“ ing waves the spirit of genius had so “ often floated. I envied those high-ff priests of gallantry who still awakened the decaying embers of the illustrious “ order of Troubadours in Thoulouse, and still presided o’er the laws of love, of “ poesy, and song. 1 even determined to “ emulate their talents, and to become a (t candidate for the golden violet instituted “ by the accomplished Ciemence d’Isaure, " countess of Thoulouse, as the reward of u poetical merit. I hastened to Thou-“ louse in the habit of a minstrel, and <f sung those verses to the harp which “ were the first effusions of my rustic “ muse. My youth and rank shed anex-“ traneou3 merit on my lays they intrinsi-cally did not possess : the golden violet “ was adjudged me, and gratified ambi-,f tion flushed her triumphs in my young “ aspiring heart. I was then scarcely 5* sixteen ; and the errors of youth, in a <f literary sense, generally find that toléra-ct tion which, in a moral one, is so seldom

THE NOVICE OF

“ denied them. My indulgent father participated in my success; and though then at Paris, suffered me to remain at f< Thoulouse, to perfect myself in the ele* ee gant and useful exercises of the sword (t and horsemanship, until weariness or “ satiety should cancel the immunity,

“ It was at this period I formed a friend-ship with a young Englishman of rank, “ Robert Sidney,* the second son of Sir “ Henry Sidney, brother to the immortal <f Sir Philip, and nephew to the favourite “ of Elizabeth, the celebrated Earl of “ Leicester ; who was then at Thoulouse, “ on his return from Italy by France to “ England, under the care of his intelli-“ gent tutor, Mr. SavilJ,+ and accompa-ff nied by another young Englishman of “ fortune, Mr. Nevill. Fascinated by the manners, the talents, the solid and

* Afterwards earl of Leicester, f See Sir Philip Sidney’s Letter to his brother Robert.

ST. DOMINICK,

165

“ useful information, which distinguished “ this little groupe of foreigners from the <( frivolous visitants which Italy so fre-(C quently sent us, and the volatile and un-“ steady though sanguine characters of *' the young Provençal», I clung to these {( amiable strangers, and so far insinuated " myself into their favour, as to induce u them to accompany me back to Mon-“ targis, where they became my guests for f< some weeks,

(f Under the guiding precepts, with the rf shining example, of his illustrious bro« ft ther to light him on his way, the young-" er Sidney had travelled over the greater " part of Europe, and was now returning f( to England, rich in the spoils of his ac-“ curate observation on men and man-ners; and when he dwelt with anima-“ tion on the scenes through which he had tf passed, the characters he had mingled f< with, or the adventures he had encoun-tf tered, I shrunk back upon myself in con-scious inferiority, and secretly repro-

IGG

THE NOVICE OF

“ bated the fond apprehensions of my fa-<f ther, which had confined me so long “ within the safe limits of a domestic cir-“ cle. But when my new friend spoke of “ his illustrious, his all-accomplished bro-<e ther, who was by many years his elder; “ when I learnt that Sir Philip Sidney, <r when little more than my age, had tra-“ veiled through Europe, commanding at-“ tention from every ear, respect from “ every mind, affection from every heart; *s that the proud Austrian viceroy of the “ Netherlands treated him with more pub-“ lie honours than the ambassadors of so-“ vereigns; and though a stranger, with-ct out title, power, or any of those alluring “ baits to popularity, he had been in elec-ci tion for the crown of Poland, a circum-“ stance more glorious than if the diadem “ of a world had encircled his brow by “inheritance;—my bosom glowed, my V heart beat—I felt as did Cæsar when “ he read of the juvenile feats of Alexan-“ der. I accompanied my English friends

ST. DOMINICK.

167

<f (o Paris: I threw myself at my father’s “ feet, conjured him no longer to suffer his son, his only son, to waste the pre-“ cious years of youth in inglorious indo-“ lence, but to permit me to visit that <f country which claimed Sir Philip Sid-6t ney as her son, which then boasted of a “ Raleigh, an Essex, a Bacon, a Shak-" speare ! My entreaties were seconded “ by the pressing instances of my new “ friends, and a polite invitation from Sir st Henry Sidney. My father’s tenderness (( yielded to those combined solicitations, “ and I was suffered to accompany these ,f amiable Englishmen to their native “ country. I was received at Baynard “ Castle with the cordial welcome which (l distinguishes the old English hospitality from that of the continent ; not only by “ Sir Henry, who had just returned from “ his third expedition to Ireland as Lord-“ Deputy, but by the lady Mary Sidney, “ a daughter of the illustrious house of “ Northumberland, and by their incom-

168

THE NOVICE OF

parable son, on whom nature, lame, and “ fortune, seemed to vie in showering th* <c choicest favours. As learned in the tf schools as gallant in the field, as ele-,e gantly refined at the levee as unaffect-i( edly endearing in his domestic circle, " hyperbole itself must fail in the attempt i( to do justice to bis illustrious character. fC Although his own poetic genius was <c sufficient to command immortality, the i( Maecenas of his day, he had the true <( greatness of mind to encourage merit in u others wherever he found it, unbiassed “ by the narrow views of policy or osten-t( tation. It was at bis house I became ac-(r quainted with the celebrated Edmund “ Spencer ; his friend John Chalkhill, the “ pastoral poet $ Mr. Fairfax, the elegant “ translator of Tasso, and William Shak-“ gpeare, the first dramatic poet of this or perhaps any other age. There too Ï be-“ came known to Sir Philip’s friend and <f relative the all-accomplished GrevilJe, u lord Brooke, who united so much solid

ST. DOMINICK.

169

learning to all the attractive blandish-“ ments of poetical genius ; Sir Walter “ Raleigh, of whose universal capacity it “ has been said, he was born only for what “ he undertook; the witty Sir John Har-“ rington, who has flung over the splendid u images of Ariosto the graces of English “ drapery; and the earl of Essex, the hero “ of his nation, the idol of his sovereign's tc heart, and undoubtedly one of the most “ elegant writers of the day.

“ Among those bright Pleiades, a coun-tryman of my own shone a star of no inferior magnitude; but his lustre was rather the reflection of superior virtue “ than superior talents. The chevalier de “ Sorville was then a visitor at Baynard castle : he had many years before formed a connection with Sir Philip, when the ‘Matter was on his travels; he had met him at Paris during the fatal eve of St. <f Bartholomew. Of different persuasions they had been equally active in the cause “ of humanity, when the bigotry of mis-

VOL. II.

H

1T0	THE	NOVICE OF

“ taken religion aimed a vital blow at her " heart; till the benevolent temerity of “ the chevalier rendered him incapable of “ further exertion, and the perils which " surrounded him obliged the young Eng-“ lishman to seek personal safety in the house of the then English ambassador, “ the celebrated Sir Francis Walsingham.

As the friend and relative of the count “ St. Dorval, I met the cordial advances “ of the amiable de Sorville with coldness “ and reluctance. His superior mind “ smiled compassionately'on the prejudice fi of my boyish unformed character, and “ to his persevering kindness I now owe “•the proudest boast of my life, that of be-“ ing his friend.

“ The visit of this virtuous man to “ England was not merely a visit of friendship or curiosity: his mind still point-C€ ing with invariable impulse to the mag-netic attraction of benevolence, he had “ come to England in the hope of amelio-<f rating the fate of the hugonot cmi-grants, whom the cruelty of Philip II.

ST. DOMINICK.

m

had expatriated from the Netherlands, “ by his interest with the British minister “ through the medium of the Sidney fa-“ mily. He had also then formed a reso-" lution of visiting those of the jails in “ Europe whose wretched inhabitants <f have since experienced the generosity of *' his nature (to which his open purse was te ever inadequate) and the effects of his medical skill, which his study of physic tf had rendered eminent.

“ Need I add that, in such society, u every moment was more precious" than “ an age of common-place existence? “ that every better faculty of my young “ and ardent mind was roused into exer-<ftion; and that spirit of emulation, ts breathing over those embers of nature's “ fire, which the lulling powers of a flat-<c tering fortune had suffered almost to be-“ come all that I most admired in those “ whose illustrious characters made me “ feel the inconsequence of rank and c< riches, unaccompanied by virtue, ta-

1?2

THE NOVICE OF

lents, or genius? My father allowed “ me a brilliant establishment; and at my “ own desire my preceptors were English. tf While with the younger Sidney I pur-ct sued the liberal studies marked out for “iiim by his all-intelligent brother, or “ practised those manly and fashionable tc exercises in which the young English nobility excel. Sir Philip Sidney wasap-ff pointed governor of Flushing by Eliza-rf beth. His departure shed a gloom, not c< only over his family, but his country, that seemed prophetic: for, after having “ signalized himself in a manner so heroi-cal as awakened even the admiration of his enemies, at the battle of Zutphen, where his third horse was killed under “ him, he received a mortal wound, of ff which he languished twenty-five days, “ and died in the flower of his age, the ff meridian of his glory.

After a residence in England of nearly “ two years,—a residence prolonged by “ my father’s wishes, as France was at

ST. DOMINICK.

173

<c that period the scene of general warfare cc and civil discord,—I returned to Paris Ci in 1589, anxious to follow in the track “ of heroism marked out by the illustrious ‘‘ Henry of Navarre, but tied by my fa-“ mily interest to the house of Valois. On t£ the side of the king of Navarre I dared “not draw my sword; against him I “ would not. Almost personally attached “ to this amiable monarch, worshiping “ the heroic virtues of his character, con-“ vinced of the justice of his claims, and “ compassionating those injuries which “ the power and hatred of Catherine had so long heaped on him, I had no altcr-‘‘ native but to be an inactive spectator of “ his unremitted sufferings; or to fly in “ the face of my father and my king, and “join the standard of the persecuted but “ ever-magnanimous Henry.

“ It was not till thetwokings embraced i( on the plain of Tours, that I had the <£ happiness of judgingfrom actual obser-“ vation of the illustrious virtues of that

174

THE NOVICE OF

u character, which even the exaggerater “ Fame had but faintly blazoned. Shortly “ after Henry III. was murdered; and my father was among the first of the nobi-“ lity who acknowledged Henry IV. as “ the lawful sovereign of France, and at-u tached themselves to his service. Hum-“ bly following in that luminous path over “ which the splendid achievements of the king shed their glorious rays, from that ‘{ moment I have revolved round the mo-“ narch as a cynosure of valour, by whose “ beams 1 might hope to shine with re-C{ fleeted light. I have fought beneath his “ eye, in all these engagements which the <c obstinacy of faction has multiplied al-({ most beyond calculation : and that I “ have been publicly distinguished by his “ unmerited notice, is a circumstance less “ grateful to my feelings and my heart, “ than that I have been honoured by his u private attention and personal regard. “ But, while I thus weary your patience,

‘‘ my indulgent auditress, by a tale so di-

ST. DOMINICK.

175

u vested of interest, let me hasten to that “ period whose golden aspect shines re-“ splendent over the subject hours of time, and lives eternal in the records of the i( heart; that sweet period in which I felt “ a new sense of existence steal over my (t awakening senses, in which I first be-“ held Imogen of Montmorell.

“ A love of arms has been the unaliena-“ ble inheritance of a Montargis, since u first in the fields of Palestine they re-u ceived the honour of knighthood from “ St. Louis. Deeply versed in the achiev-“ merits of the heroes of France from <c the prowess of Charlemagne to the he-u roic deeds of Henry 1Y. I burned to tC draw my sword with emulating vigour, u and to gather those laurels in my youth “ on which the brow of age could repose “ in the proud consciousness of self-appro-Cl bation. But circumstances, already “ enumerated, prevented my engagingin Cc the civil wars of France; and the in-“ testine discords which agitated Italy, and P which were rather the strugglingeftorts

176

THE NOVICE OF

of banditti for the supremacy of slaugh-Ci ter and rapine, offered no colour of ex-Ci cuse to a man of honour to join in Ci them : besides, my ardent passion for “ arms w as tempered by a sentiment which “ had been the object of early reflection, “ strengthened into principle, that he w ho <c draws an offensive sword, who endea-vours to purchase fame by the wanton f6 destruction of his species, even though “ success sheds her roses over'the bloody 1 track of his deathful career, and the “ wreath of conquest blushes round his c: victor brow, is but an assassin. Let the “ sword of the valiant leap from its scab-bard in the cause of oppression ; let it “ deal destruction to those w ho would “ violate the liberty of their country, in-c* fringe upon the sanctity of its laws, who “ would aim a blow at the life of a wise {i and virtuous sovereign, or impiously (c dare to profane the sacred, the immuta-“ ble, rights of mankind : but let it repose “ for ever, with the spirit of un wakened <c vengeance, in honourable peace, rather

ST. DOMINICK.

m

c< than stain its polished surface with the <£ blood of the invalid, the enslaved, or <c unresisting."

A brighter How burnt on the cheek of

3	o

the baron as he spoke ; the animation of his eyes kindled into radiance, and the tones of his voice rose beyond their ordinary round and harmonious pitch : then, after a pause, while the kindling countenance of Imogen reflected back the fire of his own, and her half-moving lips seemed to articulate those sentiments which her heart so truly, so sympathetically echoed, he added, modestly casting down his eyes:

“ Some little opposition of sentiment and ff conduct brought on the displeasure of the ff then reigning king,* and the strongest “ disapprobation of my father. I was sent, ff a willing exile, to the chateau de Montar-<f gis. Fleet and pleasant were the hours of “ my unbroken solitude ; the soft recollec-“ tions of the heart gave me back those ob-

* Henry HI. O

II

TUE NOVICE OF

“ jcctsso beloved in childhood, and awak-ened a lingering thrill of those transports (l which usher in the golden dawn of life.

Music and poetry again received iny “ homage ; nor did their blandishments ff alone occupy my time and thoughts. “ No baron in the south of France boasted “ a more numerous vassalage than my fa-ther : brought up and educated amongst “ the young serfs of the extensive domain of Montargis, frequently the participa-tor of their rural sports, and their com-petitor in rural games, I had acquired an interest in their hearts, which neither my rank nor fortune could have en-“ dowed me with. France boasted not a bolder or more vigorous race of peasan-" try. The chain which feudal immunity “ vested in the hands of power sat lightly cc over them ; and the spirited ardour even of comparative independence warmed “ their minds, and mingled its spirit with that true Provençal hilarity which their “ skies for ever blue, their gales for ever <f genial, inspire.

ST. DOMINICK.

179

ff I always delighted in that antique pu-rity of morals, that still-retained charac-u ter of ancient manners, and that still-ff cherished taste for poesy and song, cc which from its first colonization distin-“ guished Provence ; and I now delighted “ in embodying those of its animated and hardy youths, whom at a future day I “ should claim as my own immediate sub-ejects, into a little military phalanx, more ff precious to my heart than that of Alex- ' cc ander’s, all invincible as it was, could have been to his: for every artery of " that heart swelled with a kind of colla-“ teral affection for those who would as willingly have sacrificed their lives for me, as I would have laid down mine for “ them. Well-skilled in the theory of fC tactics and use of arms, though little ff versed in the practice, my own unwea-“ ried endeavours, and the assistance of fC some veteran officers belonging to the “ garrison of Avignon, soon rendered my [' little army one of the best disciplined

THE NOVICE OF

<{ in the realm. The vigour of constitu-“ lion, the ardour of youth, the spirited <c vivacity of their province, all conduced “ to perfect them into dauntless and able <f soldiers.

“ Accustomed alternately to wield the “ instruments of war or the implements of <f agriculture, they were now enabled to “ defend the fields they cultivated ; and, “ proud of their newly-acquired preroga-ec tive, laid down those arms they wielded ff during the winter season, and resumed " the cutting-knife of the summer vin-" tage. When time and the fond solicitations of nature restored me to my farther’s heart, I h.steel to Paris, and ,€ continued in the new king’s army,* hur-“ ried on by the perpetual vicissitudes of “ civil war, almost forgetful of my little "provincial forces: when the discomfi-“ ture of his majesty before the alls ef “ Rouenne, and his doubtful hopes of “ success before those of Neufchatel, call-

Henry IV.

ST. DOMINICK.	181

et ed for the most vigorous’exertions on the “ part of his adherents. Several of the <f nobility had flown to their castles, armed (< their vassals, and returned to the field “ with those hnstily-embodiedand ill-orga-“ nized troops,* who had only animal ‘f courage to supply the deficiency of mi-ff litary skill. It was then the recollec-<e tion of my corps de reserve started to my mind ; and in the same moment they “ were offered and accepted by the king. The difficulties however I had to en-counter were such, as those noblemen <f who had brought their auxiliary troops ff to the royal camp were not exposed to.

I had to lead a considerable body “ from the most southern to almost the u most northern part of France, and f: through those provinces thickly scat-“ tered over with the enemy’s forces ; but

* In the memoirs of the Duke de Sully, we find that faithful minister more than once (lying from the royal camp to the chateau de Rosni, and returning to the king with men and provisions.

1S2

THE NOVICE OF

^ to the adventurous mind of youth, each cc obstacle i9 but a resistless lure to hazard-tc ous enterprise.

The king, with fatherly solicitude, c< warned me of the perils that hung on the undertaking ; but his tender anxiety,

“ which buried the interest of the sovereign in the safety of the subject, only acted “ as a stimulus to my intention.* Dis- . " guised in the habit of a Provencal min-<c slrel whom I had brought with me to <e the camp, mounted on his gaudily ca-“parisoned horse, with my harp and pro-“ fessional badge before me, I left the <f walls of Neufchatel on the day that his

* During the civil wars of France, this romanlic masquerading in perilous exigencies was bv no means unfrequent; and the chivalrous enthusiasm of the times had communicated its peculiarities not only to the military spirit, but even to the amorous passiou, of the day. Thus we find Henry the Great disguised asa peasant, bending beneath a heavy burden, passing through the heart of the enemy’s army, to visit his beautiful mistress, Gabrielle D’Estrées, at her father the lord de Courcy’s castle in Picardy.

ST. DOMINICK.

183

“ majesty withdrew his army. The native ff romance of my character, the novelty of my adventure, the sanguine glow of expectation, and the flushing hopes of “ success, swelled my heart with pleasure, ‘fand animated the spirit of enterprize <r almost beyond the bound of temerity. fC Not content with passing in safety along the skirts of the enemy’s camp during* ,c my first day’s journey, I determined on the second to follow the example of “ Alfred, and, under cover of my min-iC strelsy, plunge into the heart of the C( Leaguers’ army, become master of their <c intentions, the strength of their forces, f£ and, rich in the spoils of my ingenuity, “ return to the king before I proceeded to Provence. But not to weary thee, sweet ff lady, with the loitering details of egotism, ff suffice it to say, that, having entered the iC camp, been loaded with the caresses of “ the soldiery, and even introduced to the ff tent of the heroic prince of Parma and y the duke de Mayenne, I was discovered

m

THE NOV*CE OF

v by an officer of the royal army who ff had lately "one over to the League ; “ and, according to the inviolable laws of “ war, 1 was condemned to expiate my <f imprudence by my life. One alterna-Cf tive only was left me, to unite myself and my interests to those of the League.

To you 1 need not say, I was pre-pared to die: but the policy of the “ League gave deliberation to all their <f measures, and, instead of being led to in-stant death, I was conveyed to the castle

of N------, a strong hold of the League,

<f and strictly guarded. The only indul-gence allowed me was my harp. Tor-“ tured by the insupportable agonies of “ that suspense which my doubtful fate “ awakened, torn by the cruel supposition of my father’s sufferings for my loss, (C pressed to the earth by that profound <f disappointment which hung on the death “ of my sanguine hopes, and weary of a “ confinement which no friendly visitation “ enlivened, no social intercouse amused.

ST. DOMTNICK.

185

in the strains of my favorite and national rt instrument I strove to lull the sad per-c< turbations of my mind, the cruel disap-ft pointment of my hopes. It was on the “ last evening-of my first month’s confine-ment that, seating myself at the grates ff of my prison casement, I drew my harp towards me, and, sunk by the oppres-sive conviction that, while my country <c and my king called for my exertions, “ while my heart throbbed with ardour, while every nerve thrilled with irritation, “ I was wasting life away in the confines tc of a prison, with no hope of release but " what a threatened death held out, I “ struck a few low chords, and murmured out the plaintive sonnet of Tasso, written “ during his long and unjust imprison-ment, and which so simply, so aflfect-t( ingly, depicts the sorrows of his heart.

“ Tu che vai in Pitido “ Ivi pende mia citra ad un cipresso “ Salutala in mio home e dille poi “ Chio so dagli anni c da fortuna oppres3o/’

THE NOVICE OF

Tears, such as those which haply in “ the bitterness of his heart fell from the ° eyes of the Italian bard as he indited “ these lines, fell on the chords of my “ harp as I sung them ; and, vanquished by the hopeless influence of despon-“ dency, my hands fell from the instru-“ ment, the air died an my lips. At that “ moment a voice without the grate took “ up the unfinished air, and answered to my plaints in the well-known dialect of " my native province. If my recollection “ assists me right, the sonnet ran thus :

“ Let not hope expire in the heart of “ the valiant What suffering is support-<c able, if that which arises from our virtue te and our courage is not to be endured ? “ Montargis is in the hands of his ene-mies ; but a power higher than they possess hovers round him with the wings of safety. Sweet and omnipotent is its “ influence ; it shall rescue him from dan-" ger, and plunge him into a slavery more “ precious than freedom, whose fetters are roses, whose-------”

ST. DOMINICK..

1S7

The baron suddenly stopt; then, casting down his eyes, added : tl But the rest fC of this wild and mysterious strain ties “ escaped recollection. Suffice it to say, “ that, while I hung in amazement on the “ sound, it suddenly ceased. When hope “ illumines her lamp in the cell of cap-“ tivity, the dungeon’s noxious vapour and “ chilling gloom evaporate, and the cap-“ tive revels in the sweet anticipation of ‘‘ ideal liberty ; despair flies his heart, and ‘‘ smiling expectation smooths the pensive u furrow of his care-knit brow. From u the moment I heard those strains of na-“ tive melody, which embodied the belief <e of a speedy emancipation, I became in-?c sensible to the shackles of my froward u destiny. Mysterious as were the senti-a ments of the song, they lured back hope ec to my sinking heart; and in a variety of <l wild surmises, vague expectations, and “ flattering thoughts, passed away a night “ despair no longer rendered wakeful. u The impatient weariness of suspense

188

THE NOVICE OF

“ hung heavily on the lagging hours of a the succeeding day, and my heart wel-(i corned in the pensive approach of even-“ ing with a throb of rapture long unknown to its languid pulsation. Again I seated “ myself at the casement, struck a few “ chords on my harp, and accompanied a u Provençal air with my voice. I paused <( in all the anxiety of intense expectation, “ but no note of sympathy echoed back “ the strain. My heart trembled over the u wreck of my hopes.

“ Again I played; again I paused, but “ paused in vain : and despair and disap-<c pointment rose over the ruins of my a treacherous expectations : and yet, ere “ the first faint beam of morning played “ through the grating of my prison-win-“ dow, free as the fragrant air I breathed, “ I found myself a league from the town

<< of N-----. It seemed the work of ma-

«:ie, and conviction almost refused its

O 1

suffrage to the testimony of the senses.” “ And by what extraordinary means, my

ST. DOMINICK.

189

“ lord,” interrupted Imogen, with a look and accent of intense curiosity, “ did you “ so suddenly regain your freedom?”

The rich colouring of the baron’s cheek flushed to the deepest tints of crimson. “ Pardon rae,” said he in a voice of hesitation : “ over the mystery of my eman-“ cipation suffer the finger of silence to weave her impenetrable veil: ’tis honour “ that commands, gratitude that imposes fC it ; and delicacy forbids that revelation " pride might triumph to effect.” The baron paused and sighed ; Imogen caught the warm infection of his blush, sighed back his sigh, and pursued his downcast eye with a glance in which no common curiosity, no moderate interest, shone; then, hastily withdrawing her all-demanding gaze from the uplifted eye of the baron, she bowed her head, and he continued : “ During the tedious three months which “ in desponding inactivity I passed in the “ limits of my prison’s cell, the opposing armies of France, led by their respec-

190

THE NOVICE OF

u tive brave and noble chiefs, had under-€l gone a series of warlike vicissitudes, which, perplexed and confused, mocked << the power of accurate delineation to re-<c cord. To the sieges of Rouen and “ Neufchatel succeeded several splendid “ victories gained by the king over the tl Leaguers, who owed their final pre-Ci servation to that wonderful retreat of “ their general the duke of Parma, which C6 fame shall trumpet to admiring ages till 4( her last blast shall die in eternity. It was “ during that period of awful suspense the “ two armies lay scattered along the shores ff of the Seine, (that of the king lulled <{ into proud but delusive security by re-tc cent success, that of the league on the “ eager watch to seize some golden op-cc portunity of redressing their losses and “ escaping the vigilance of the watchful li conqueror) that the duke of Parma, at the head of his forces, in the space of a one short night, crossed the rapid Seine ft over a slight and precarious bridge of

ST. DOMINICK.

191

“ boats ; and to this astonishing strata-(c gem the illustrious hero owed the pre-li servation of his glory, and, what must ,c have been dearer to the heart of the cc man, the safety and lives of the forces he commanded.

“ The following morning presented to “ the astonished gaze of the self-wrapt roy-te alists a scene that appeared almost un-“ der the influenceof magical operation; a “ desolated plain, where a few hours before “ a splendid armament spread its numerous w and gaudy multitude, now appeared to “ their eye unmarked even by a single trace *c of that pompous retinue of war, the splen-did panoply of military establishment, “ which in the sunbeam of the preceding “ evening glittered to their eyes, or of the busy bustling murmur of a camp’s unbri-“ died licence, which the stillness of the t( midnight breeze had wafted to their ears.

An action so congenial to the spirit of the king, even though performed by an e< enemy, called forth in his generous heart

192

THE NOVICE OF

cr the liveliest sympathy of admiration ; " and the successful stratagem of his rival, “ far from depressing his spirits, only “ served as a stimulus to an exertion of “ corresponding heroism. He ^instantly “ assembled a council of war, and pro-“ posed the immediate pursuit of the ene-iC my over the narrow pass of the pont de “ l’Arch. But the council of Henry, like c( his army, was composed of those whose “ views, interests, religions, and princi-a pies, were equally opposed, |and ever tc kept alive a mutual distrust and differ-“ ence of opinion with respect to mea-“ sures, which frequently frustrated the “ best-designed projects of their king.

fr In the instance of this proposal only, “ however, the crude contraries of faction 'f seemed to blend into one united mass “ of opposition against the bold and poli-“ tic measure proposed by their king. rf The heart of Henry received a profound wound by this opposition ; but “ the vaulting hopes of his magnanimous

ST. DOMINICK.»

193

ff emulation were forced to swim with the “ torrent of popular opinion ; and that “ year’s campaign being concluded, he “ resolved to turn the opinion of his coun-cil to some account, by granting a truce “ to the harassing fatigues of war, and “ giving that repose to his troops that “ would cheer and invigorate them for fu-*' ture action. With that lavish generosity, “ which his liberal nature so frequently " suffers to degenerate into an imprudence by which he is ever a sufferer, he distri-<( buted all the money he possessed among “ his soldiers, and permitted the officers to “ return to their respective homes, until " the urgency of the times should again ff call on their exertions. Then, deter-“ mining to seize on this temporary eman-tf cipation from the blood-stained shackles of war, and convert it into an era of ff blissful enjoyment, the king resigned himself to another species of bondage, whose chains are of roses, but of roses ff not always thornless. The royal Henry,

VOL. II.	I

194

THE NOVICE OF

“ ever alive to the allurements of pleasure ef when the claims of duty did not oppose “ her witchcraft spell, was at this period in the first stage of that passion which “ the beautiful Gabrielle d’Estrees still “ kçeps alive in his usually inconstant heart. His mind, harassed by the weary-ing oppositions of faction, the change-“ ful anxiety of war’s vicissitudes, sought “ a solace in those rich blisses love alone bestows; and, accompanied by a few chosen friends, he set out for Picardy,* “ the residence of his mistress, to gratify

* Henry the Fourth, when in pursuit of the prince of Parma, stole away from the army, and went to visit, for the first time, the beautiful Gabrielle at Couvres. He contented himself with eating- bread and butter at the gate, that he might not raise any suspicions in her father: afterwards, mounting his horse, he said he was going towards the enemy, and the fair one should see what deeds he would perform through his passion for her.

See Pere Mathitv, vol. ji. p. 39. Mademoiselle d’Estrées, the most beautiful woman of the age she lived in, was daughter to Antoine

ST. DOMINICK.

195

*' the longings of his enamoured heart. <f Such was the situation of affairs when I

“ fled from the prison of N--. Instead

Cf of going to Picardy, where my father “ held the goverment of a town, and the lr king then resided, I determined to con-“ tinue the route, and prosecute the in-“ tention which first led me from the “ camp.

To thee I will confess that the expe-“ rienced disappointment of my romantic " views had not yet dried up the source “of enthusiasm from whence they sprung $ ct that I was still enamoured of a project which had for its object the service of rny king; and that I felt myself bound “ to realize a voluntary offer made with a “ confident certainty of performance, even “ at a risk imminent as that I had already

d’Estrées, lord of Couvres, of the most ancient family in Picàrdy. She was forced by her father to marry Nicholas d’Amerval, lord of Liancourt, but afterwards continued to live publicly as the king’s mistress till ber death.

196	TUE NOVICE OF

“ encountered. 1 determined therefore to “ proceed to Provence, embody there my “ little phalanx, and march to Picardy “ to join the king, who it was already “ rumoured intended to reassemble his “ forces in that province, where he had as “ yet only shewn himself in the lists of love. The only pang to which my heart €< was alive, at that moment of sanguine “ expectation, was that awakened by the f< recollection of my father, who was still " uncertain of the fate of his only son ;

- ‘ while I was equally uncertain whether “ my adventure and imprisonment had reached his ears ; but I preferred pro-“ longinghis anxiety a little to disappoint-(* ing his hopes.

€t The sun had not imbued the horizon “ with his golden waves when I found “ myself a league and a half from the

town of N-----, Here, ascending an

“ eminence, I paused, and turned my eyes “ towards the lofty turrets of my late pri-“ son, which, bearing their dark grey

ST. DOMINICK.

197

r‘ beaus above the morning mists, rose on ‘‘ my 'gaze like the gloomy visions of <f my departed sufferings. All I had en-dured there rushed across my mind in “ comparative force with the feelings and c< situation of the present moment. Oh, my “ sweet friend ! liberty, like health, must “ be lost or suspended ere its blessings can “ be truly estimated. He who has ne’er in-fs haled the dungeon's poisonous vapour;

who has ne’er thrown his dim and hope-“ less glance o’er the viewless space of its “ dark and narrow limits; who has ne’er “ hung upon the joyless stillness of its ff awful silence, to catch one wished-for “ human sound ; or cast an eager longing ° look through the grated loop-hole of his “ cell, to catch one beam of long-excluded “ light, feels not, conceives not, how much f- on the enjoyment of natural and ra-“ tional liberty rests the primary source “ of all human felicity; and that each re-u turning day, which gives the light of C( heaven to his eye, the breath of nature

198

THE NOVICE OF

44 to his senses,, the power of renovated “ and unrestricted motion to his frame, “ (blessings insensibly, unthankfully en-ff joyed,) renews that covenant by which, 44 in the first moment of existence, God 44 endowed his creatures with a natural 44 source of happiness and enjoyment. As 44 1 turned my eyes from the gloomy aspect 44 of my prison's awful turrets, and looked 44 round on the sweet and sublime scene 44 that even to infinity spread before my 44 delighted gaze ; when the dew of heaven 44 shed its refreshing tears on my aching 14 head ; when the sun’s kindling glories 44 flung their cheering rays around me, 44 and the morning's vigorous fragrant 44 breeze breathed health and spirit over 44 my senses; when all I felt, and all I be-44 held, partook of the perfection, the har-44 mony, the love of Him by whom they 44 were created ; even in that moment of 44 sublimated feelings I struck a few chords 44 on my harp, still the companion of my 44 wanderings, and felt as if inspiration

ST. DOMINICK.

190

ff descended round me from heaven. I <f knelt and played with emotions such as the royal prophet felt when religious “ enthusiasm awoke his harp’s inspired “ strains; while the tear of rapture and of ff gratitude dried on my burning cheek. “ Yes, lady, ’tis to thee I will confess ‘f what the world would decide as romantic " weakness ; to thee confess, that a sol-dier’s often blood-stained cheek blushed not to receive the tear religious grali-“ titude had extracted ; for it is for a mind “ like thine only to feel those pure, those “ sublime emotions which rarefy and sub-limate the soul of man to an essence of heaven itself.”

(C Oh !” exclaimed Imogen, while her half-raised eye floated in tear* of sympathy, f<r to few are given such refined capa-“ bilities of feeling ; to those only whom heaven creates symbolic of its own per-ff fection, connecting, by an intermediate “ degree of excellence, the Almighty to his creatures, man to God !”

THE NOTICE OF

The soul-beaming eyes of the baron pursued the kindling animation, the increasing tenderness, of Imogen’s looks ; and after a pause, such as the heart and imagination love to prolong, yet which covered the cheek of Imogen with blushes, and communicated a soft and indefinable agitation to the air and countenance of the baron, he replied:	If	the	rapture	such

cf feelings awaken can admit of an extra-ft neous increase, it is bestowed by the “ sweet consciousness that those refined a powers of emotion and thought are not “ a solitary undivided bliss, but, like every “ other joy of the soul, rise in the scale of “ rapture in proportion as it is participat-,lf ed. O God ! who that has a heart to feel “ has not felt the vast difference that lies between the enjoyment which wakes <f into solitary existence, and dies as it i: lives, and that thrilling transport which “ steals its birth from the glowing, the refined communication of two kindred <f souls ? Then, Imogen, when even the

ST. DOMINICK.

201

most elevated power of language refuses “ its expression to the vivid, the heart-dis-“ solving feelings, then, my sweet friend! <c when the eye’s soul-sent glance, the 4C cheek’s vital blush, the sigh’s rapturous “ heave, and even (seizing her hand) the c* pulse’s kindred throb, perpetuate the te silent communion, such as the ignorant “and unfeeling suppose disembodied spi-

<( rits only hold---” The baron paused;

the hand he held trembled in his ardent grasp; the melting look his eye pursued shrunk beneath the expression of his burning glance; the heart to which he appealed throbbed with soft but obvious violence. “ Imogen ! O Imogen 1” he added, raising her hand to his lips, et suffer “ me even now to believe we illustrate ts the sweetest truth the heart ever sub-scribed to; for now, oh sure, we fee 1 together 1”

It was not till after a silence, a dangerous silence, of some minutes, that Imogen released a hand that blushed with the warm

i 2

202

THE ICOVICE OF

impression of the baron’s lip ^ and, with a faint smile and tremulous accent, demanded if he believed the interest his story had awakened in her bosom did not suffer from this long interruption ? The baron, starting as from a dream " that wrapt him ie in Elysium,” endeavoured to collect his scattered thoughts, and reassumed his detail : “ I continued my solitary way with <( a rapid and silent step,! pausing at intervals to catch the fancied sound of ff pursuit and then hurrying on towards te a small town on the frontiers of Cham-“ pagne, which I intended to make the “ goal of that day’s journey. This I " reached in safety before sunset. Here “ I purchased a horse with what money I "had left, and wrote to my father.* Re-

freshed by the first night’s sweet and “ undisturbed slumber I had long enjoyed rc (while fancy still gave to my ear the ac-ff customed foot-fall of my guard,) I arose

* Regular posts were first established in France by Henry the Fourth.

ST. DOMINICK.

203

“ before dawn ; and mounting my new-rf purchased steed, and slinging my harp “ behind me, I proceeded on my journey ff with renovated strength and spirits. C( The day was mild and beautiful, and I ff was met by several groups of peasants, “ who demanded specimens of my tuneful art, and endeavoured, by many hospi-tc pitable offers, to lure me to thear hum-“ ble dwellings ; while they lamented the “ decay of my profession, which was fast “ falling into disrepute. The night of this day I passed in the cottage of a wood-cutter, whose roof resounded to “ the echo of that merriment and festivity fr my harp awakened ; while his numerous cc and charming family overwhelmed me “ with gratitude and caresses for the “ amusement I afforded them. When ft wearied with dancing, they crowded i( round me, and demanded the tale of “ other times ; and their eager, their ex-“ pressive countenances glowed as they “ listened to the feats of genii and fairies.

THE NOVICE OF

of giants and warriors ; the young cling-“ ing to me in all the energy of unsubdued <c feeling and animated curiosity, the old “ listening in sober and undivided atten-€t lion. Never did I feel more strongly how much sweeter it is to give than to receive pleasure ; never did I triumph “ more in the possession of my little talents iC than in that moment, when I felt con-“ scious that it was to their influence alone “ I owed the admiration, the respect, the te welcome, that shone in every counten-ance. The smiles I awakened were (< not the sycophantic leer of interest paid “ to fortune ; the embrace I received was not the pressure of servility allured by “ rank. Oh ! the vast pleasure in being “ loved, in being respected for one’s self “ alone !” The baron fixed his impassioned glance on Imogen’s face, and read in the expression of her eloquent countenance the corresponding sentiments of her full heart; then with a long-drawn sigh he continued :—

ST. DOMINICK.

205

“ Pleased with my adventure, I courted “ a similar fate the following night, and “ again became the nocturnal guest of a ‘'peasant’s dwelling; and the novelty <( which an intercourse with these children c( of nature possessed shed an extraneous <e charm over the pleasure such an inter-“ course awakened. The sphere of my “ (hitherto limited) affections extended to “ receive the sentiments these my lowly rf brethren excited ; and I felt the natural “ affinity as strong which united me to the poor and lowly as when it bound me only to my equals ; convinced that vir-“ tue and genius are the only natural dis-ff tinctions which raise man above his fel-fC lows. It was on the evening of my third €€ day’s journey that I found my musing “ mind had led me some leagues from my “ destined route; and that, instead of pur-“ suing my way to the southern skirts of “ Champagne, I had taken the road to “ the central part of the province, over “ which several marauding parties of the

THE NOVICE OF

fc enemy’s troops were scattered. The “ sun had already withdrawn his last cc beams from the summits of the highest “ trees of a forest which lay to the east, when, from an opening in that part of ee the road which flanked a hill near whose “ brow I rode, l perceived a numerous “ patrole crossing the path I was about to <f take. Sensible of my danger, 1 turned “ my horse’s head, doubled the angle of fc the hill, and, while I fancied the sound “ of pursuit every moment met my ear more distinctly, I reached the borders of the forest. At that instant the deep iC red clouds which for some time had tC floated, like vast meteors, in the at-u mosphere, darkened into impenetrable <c gloom j then, drawing together with “ electric force, burst with a horrid crash, “ and discharged torrents of rain, while “ the thunder’s distant growl gradually <l deepened into peals that seemed to shake “ the foundation of the earth, and the u gloom of impenetrable darkness was at

ST. DOMINICK.

207

“ intervals made visible by streams of viv-<{ id fire. Scared by a flash of lightning, “ my wild and ill-trained steed plunged €i madly on, and, before I could check his headlong course I found myself in the u centre of the forest. Mere I alighted, “ threw my horse's bridle over a withered u stump, and, covering my little harp with (6 my mantle, proceeded to the shelter the “ wide-spreading branches of a tree af-a forded ; when the animal, frightened i( by some electric fire that sank into the “ earth at his feet, snapt his bridle, and “ fled with a velocity that mocked the (< hope of pursuit.

c< While labouring under the unpleasant “ sensations such an accident and such a situation was calculated to awaken, I “ perceived,-through the dripping foliage, “ a ray of light the surrounding darkness “ rendered conspicuous. Its dusky hue <c convinced me it was emitted from some Ci distant casement; and, animated by the « hope of finding an asylum for the night.

208

THE NOVICE OF

u I struggled through the briars and un-“ derwood that opposed my passage; and, c‘ after an hour’s painful walk, pursuing “ the trembling beacon that at intervals tC wholly disappeared, I found myself be-<£ neath the ramj)arts of a vast and ancient ££ castle. The lights passing and repass-<£ ing in the casements told me its inha-“ bitants had not yet retirt d to rest. 1 his “ was a golden moment for an adventurous ci spirit; for had not necessity and extreme <c fatigue urged me to entreat admission, “ the genius of romance would have lured “ me to the attempt. Hitherto my talents et and address had only won on the hearts (( of benevolent ignorance: I was now to c£ exert their influence in a higher sphere. Cf I unmuüled my harp, and, though it ££ was something injured by the wet, yet <£ I produced some full vibrations from its <£ chords, and accompanied a pathetic Pro-“ vençal air with my voice.”

The colour deepened in the cheek of Imogen as her interest every moment in-

ST. DOMIXICK.

209

creased with the baron’s detail. Surely, thought she, it was that sweet strain which lured me to the casement of lady Magdelaine’s study.

The baron continued : “ In a few mi-“ nutes^I heard the grating of a loop-hole over a postern-gate removed. Thither I bent my steps, and struck up a lively air. In a few minutes I distinguished <f the murmuring of voices ; and, in the pause of my strains, a female accent de-tc manded who I was, and what was my ff business ? My answer was couched in " the usual address of a wandering min-" strel. I became an earnest suppliant for “ admission, and with success. I was re-“ ceived in a vast Gothic hall by a crowd “ of domestics of both sexes, who hailed “ my appearance with a riotous gaiety that “ spoke me along-wished-forguest. While I tuned my harp, the loquacious inten-“ dant of the chateau informed me 1 was ct in the ancient castle of the lady Mag-“ delaine de Montmorell, the most noble.

TflE NOVICE OF

“ puissant, learned, and pious lady in (i France, but who possessed withal no very favourable opinion of those who <f gave themselves up to mirth and pastime. “ The apprehensions, however, awakened “ by their lady’s aversion to such enjoy-fc ments were soon subdued by my harp's lively tones, and some comic romances " gleaned from the scattered minstrelsy ci of Provence, with a farandole and other “ dances, the gay impulsive propensities of a French heart, a French foot can never resist. Their mistress’s displea-“ sure was no longer remembered ; in a <c moment all was motion and hilarity ct around me, and my heart throbbed with cf corresponding emotions of pleasure. It ff was in the midst of this gay forgetfulness “ of all restriction that the commandatory “ message of the lady Magdelaine anni-hilated our throngin'»-joys, and 1 was et shortly after summoned to her presence. Although I was not personally known to the lady Magdelaine, I was not igno-

ST. DOMINICK.

211

“ rant of her family, her character, her political and religious bigotry. Her “ brother I knew had been one of the *c staunchest adherents to the League, and “ a private animosity as well as a public difference of opinion had subsisted be-“ tween him and my father; I was not, therefore, totally divested of apprehen-“ sion when I appeared at the door of her “ palladium : and while I shunned the dan-<c ger of her fixed and penetrating gaze, ci my incautious glance was riveted on “ eyes where lurked a greater but a “ sweeter peril ; for then 1 first beheld “ Imogen, like the beautifully embodied “ spirit of Peace hovering o’er the throne “ of Discord. Thy fair arm leaned on the back of the sybil’s chair, and on that fair arm reposed a fairer face, shaded by a veil whose dark drapery increased by fr contrast the snowy lustre of thy com-plexion, the beamy radiance of thine eye. Oh ! it was a sweet picture ; and " memory, true to its interesting charms.

212

THE NOTICE OF

“ has oft restored it to my eye in all its “ primitive beauty,- in all its dangerous “ softness, every feature animated by the “ fire of genius, every tint softened by “ the influence of sensibility, and the bright illuminations of mind irradiating “ the countenance of seraph innocence. “ Often, too, has remembrance lingered " on that after-moment, when thine eye’s “ soft glance first mingled with the ardent gaze of mine, when my ears received t( those sublime and eloquent sentiments “ which sunk to my soul, and flattered ,s me in the fond belief that in thee I had €i at last found the essence of myself. O “ my sweet auditress ! a thousand times <f since that moment of heart-thrilling emotion, when I have listened to the “ stale and hacknied precepts of dogma-<( tic morality, the crude and unimportant tc exhortations of religious bigotry, issu-<f ing from the bold declamatory lips of “ the popular pulpit orator, which neither liberalized the mind nor touched the

ST. DOMINICK.

213

heart, how often have I exclaimed,,

“ Why are not all preachers like the no-“ vice of St. Dominick, at once the exam-,c pie and emblem of the pure and ele-" vated virtue she teaches? or why is not “ that sex, whose lips are imbued with the spirit of persuasion, sent to us as tC the sweet missionaries of piety and vir-l( tue ? How irresistible then were the “ lures of consummate excellence!

“ Although my glowing imagination “ had often offered up its homage to the “ charms of woman, my heart as yet re-<f mained untouched. Had Imogen been “ merely beautiful, haply it had remained “ so still : had I only beheld her lovely in f‘ her modest silence, as on the night of tf my first appearance in the study of lady " Magdelaine, the morning would have (< witnessed my departure: but it was that morning that a happy circumstance “ (shall I call it so ?) betrayed to me her “ mind’s superior beauty. The spell of “ genius, of virtue, was omnipotent; I

21*

THE NOVICE OF

“ bowed to the magic of their influence, if aided by the powerful charm of youth and loveliness, of tenderness and sensi-bility. There [was but one spot for me in the creation : that spot was the resi-f' denceof Imogen ; and I became a suc-tf cessful suppliant to breathe the same air ts she inhaled, to enjoy a temporary bJiss-(( ful existence beneath the eyes of her “ from whom I seemed to receive it. I “ reflected not that it was the son of the “ proud baron de Montargis who lived “ but for the orphan novice of St. Domi-“ nick. No ! my idea of love, like every €t other I had formed amidst the embower-ing shades, the sweet solitudes of Pro-<c vence, partook of that enthusiasm which “ the world’s phlegm calls romance, but “ without which there is no love. Oh ! if hadst thou ever felt the eager throbbing» “ of a heart that long had vainly sought “ its kindred heart, the tender longings “ of a soul that languished for its heaven-“ assorted mate, thy modest incredulity.

ST. DOMINICK.

215

“ that now averts thine eye and pales thy “ cheek, would not thus stare at that excess “ of passion which arose from the dearcon-“ viction of having found in thee my long-ft sought better self, assimilating, yet su-perior to all in myself most valued. The a frail sophisticated daughters of fashion shrunk in the scale of comparison with “ Imogen even to the last degree. Their “ vivacity bordering on licentiousness, “ their learning (when, possessed) dege-“ nerating to pedantry, their wit to slan-“ der, their blandishment to levity, dis-“ gusted most when most exerted to de-“ light; while Imogen alone realized the “ lovely vision of feminine excellence my ff heart and imagination had made the “ standard of my hopes. Dignity without “ pride, simplicity without folly, nature united to intelligence, sensibility to gaiety, tenderness to wit, and learning tc to humility, added to beauty without Cf vanity, and the graces without affecta-“ tion, were what my ambitious hopes

216

THE NOVICE OF

ff long* sought, and found at last in thee. <f My lady, look not thus incredulously ct on me; for trust me, I chatter not the “ frothy nothings of a coxcomb school ; ffcit is a soldier’s honest unsophisticated c< heart that pours the treasure of its con-fidence into thine. Was not the faith-“ fill homage of that heart attested by the incongruous conduct it governed ? The <e flame of glory, that had till then burnt “ fiercely there, became extinguished, and o’er its dying embers arose love’s softer ff fires. Dead to the calls of my country, cl the service I had promised, and still owed my king, the voice of passion only won my soul’s attention. Wrapt in love’s delusive dream, to gratify the vague and indefinite desires of my heart, “ I became a household drudge, the instru-Cf ment of female whim and female pe-dantry in its last stage of dotage and “ folly ; and a smile, a glance, from Imo-gen was the reward of an age of self-“ denial, of weariness, and disgust. Deep-

ST. DOMINICK.

21?

versed in ail the insidious sophistry of ff love, my heart perpetually furnished un-ff answerable arguments to the suggestions ff of prudence : it enumerated those he-u roes who had subdued their desire of <c glory to gratify the sweeter ambition of u vanquishing a tender, a sensible heart. “ Last on the list appeared the ever-ena-ef moured Henry. Why, when the flame of glory burned brightest round him, “■ did he fly from victory’s loud plaudits in c< the fields of Coutras, but to lay the co-ff lours he had taken at the feet of the beautiful countess de Guichc, in whose “ eyes only he sought his immortality ?— “ Why did he conclude a hasty and im-" prudent truce with his crafty enemy, “ but in his ardent impatience to enter on a more endearing treaty with the young “ and lovely de Tignonville? And why, “ even now, when almost certain success “ lures him to the pursuit of his active “ enemy, does he abandon the promised “ conquest, and at the feet of Gabrielle

VOL. II.	K

218

THE NOVICE OF

“ d’Estrées fondly own himself the con-“ quered? Yes, said I, be thou,, immor-,f tal hero, in all, as in thy rank, my great “superior; but in love, though thou art #t Passion’s warmest child, I will get goal “ for goal with thee.”

“ My lord, my lord,” interrupted Imogen, blushing, distressed, and yet delighted, “ you forget that it was a history of “ your life, not of your sensations, you had “ entered on ; admitting such sensations “ were ever awakened in your heart by “ an object who feels herself unworthy, “ as she is incredulous, of the honour as-“ signed her.”

“ 1 understand you, lady,” said the baron reproachfully: “ the daughter of the count de St. Dorval is weary of listening “ to the progressive influence of that pas-“ sion Imogen of Montmorell did not “ once disdain to acknowledge she had

w

“ inspired. O Imogen ! do you then for-“ get that evening, which in the records “ of my memory holds a distinct place

ST. DOMINICK.

219

u from the cold account of time, when, “ panting, blushing, in all thy soul-dis-“ solving modesty, those eyes, in tender “ languishment, raised their melting glance to mine, and when I swore I f< loved, they bade me not despair? wnen “ for the first and last time I folded thee to a heart, whose every pulse in love’s <c sweet sympathy beat true to thine ?” Agitated, overwhelmed with confusion, in an accent lralf-iinpassioned, half-reproachful, she tremulously replied, No, “ my lord, I have not forgot that even-“ ing ; yet had I learnt the lesson thy example taught me, 1 had long, long ff since, forgot both it and th.ee.” The warm tear which wounded affection sent to her eye, her pride forbade to stain the indignant blush that burnt on her cheek : it swam a prisoner in its circling orbit. In the ardent gaze with which the baron pursued the fugitive emotions that flitted over the countenance of Imogen, lurked a triumph the suppliant glance of love could not wholly subdue.

220

THE NOVICE OF

“ Imogen/’ he said, taking her hand, <e even thy reproach is dear to me, since it betrays that a lingering interest, whose “ existence I scarcely dared to hope, has survived the intervention of time and' absence. Nor is it the less gracious for being undeserved : for no pang of con-science awakens to its tenderly accusing sound ; my conduct lias been the result 4f of necessity, not of volition; my actions ce have been foreign to my heart, but my “ heart has ever been true to thee—But to “ resume—

jc I will confess to thee, sweet lady, that, in pursuing the golden vision of my !\ fond imagination, 1 scarcely had an object or aim in view. To see, to hear " thee, to catch the timid glance of thine eye, to receive the smile of thy lip, to te pursue the varying blush of. thy cheek, “ and hang with rapturous delight upon “ the hope, the enjoyment, or the recol-“ lection of those moments, which love " stole for me, and Imogen blest with her

ST. DOMINICK.

221

“ presence; such was the boundary of c{ my wishes and my thoughts. Life tC at that sweet era was all a blissful “ dream, with no other aliov to its ima-“ ginary delights than the fear of being “ awakened excited : but the dream of “ my heart was at last doomed to destruc-“ tion ; and when the sweet illusion va-“ nished, I found I was destined to love 44 without the hope of ever possessing my “ love’s fair object. My father’s ancestral 64 pride, his hatred of the catholic faith, “ the ambitious views he had formed for “ his only son, were the objects which “ reason, prudence, and conviction, perpe-“ tually brought to my mind : while love, “in laughing mischief, conjured up the ‘‘ form of the Novice of St. Dominick

»

“ and those tormenting spirits sank before “ the magic sound of the all-powerful ex-“ orcist. The hatred of the Friar, and, (< to confess the truth, the disgusting par-“ tialitv of the lady INragdelaiue, hourly “ urged my departure ; and yet it was a

222

THE NOVICE OF

“ circumstance more powerful in its in-fluence than either, that determined me “ to a step my heart and senses still rejected. On the morning of my last day’s residence at the chateau, the fa-ther Anselm entered the apartment of “ lady Magdelaine, where I sat writing, fi and informed her in Italian, of which he (< supposed me ignorant, that the blast of “ the war-horn echoed almost to the por-“ tals of the chateau : for that the royal €t army had invested Epernai, a town not two leagues distant; that a report was ** spread of the duke of Parma’s death, rc who was the soul of the League; and ff that the king himself had just come " to the relief of the duke de Biron, to tf whom he had given the command of his ff trcops. How the emotion this news u awakened in my heart escaped the pe-tf netration of the friar, can only he ac-“ counted for by the agitation hewashim-“ self plunged in; happily I was imme-“ diatcly dismissed. The king had torn

ST. DOMINICK.

2 23

“ himself from the allurements of plea-“ sure, the embrace of love, to share the C£ dangers of the lowest of his subjects;

and the suffrage which his weakness ac-‘f corded to my own no longer existed. I ‘f must fly, said I ; the voice of glory, of duty, can be no longer neglected. I “ must break the Circe-like spell which fl holds me in delighted bondage; and, to ff secure the future happiness of Imogen, <f must now sacrifice my own. Yes, while et I resigned the destiny of my love to a “ future day and happier prospects, I de-“ termined that, as soon as my. profes-cc sional duties would permit, I would ef-“ feet your escape from the chateau de Montmorell, and place you beyond the ff reach of that living-death monastic bi-“ gotry was preparing for you, by con-signing you to the care of a female friend, on whose kindness I knew I had u an unlimited letter of credit, which gra-a titude for a trifling service endowed me u with. A circumstance which took place

224:

THE NOVICE OF

“ in the morning- confirmed my intention ; “ a circumstance whioh arose from the Friar’s liavingpossessed himself of a poe-“ tical efifusion addressed to the minstrel The baron paused, and withdrew his eyes from the blushing face of Imogen.

ct The perusal of that poem awakened, “ without confirming, hopes love too *' eagerly embraced. In all the ardour of “ new-born transport, in all the livety ad-f* miration of a genius almost idolized, I *•' flew to seek the enchanting poetess.— Imogen, when will my heart be weary ee of recurring to that sweet moment when my lips first violated the sacred si-4i ience love even to adoration had till then “ imposed ;<liat moment, when one glance <6 from Imogen diffused all the poison of 64 a sweet but dangerous hope into my u heart ? Nay, avert not those eyes, that 44 then beamed not thus coldly on me; and 4‘ forgive this (to thee) idle repetition • u for, when the heart is in its dotage, it loves to pause and loiter over the tender

ST. DOMINICK.

225

tf recollection of its faded joys ; nor spares “ the patience of its auditor in the reca-<c pitulation of its treasured blisses. In “ the most enrapturing-, the richest, sweet-“ est moment of my existence, thou may-u est remember 1 was torn from thy presence b) the jealous fears of the lady “ Magdelaine. The envy and vain sus-“ picion of the friar made me a prisoner, ff ere I could unfold to thee the purposes of my heart with respect to thy future f‘ fate, or reveal my real rank and character. And yet let me say to thee, sweet lady, that in all the pride of self-love, per-“ hap9 too fastidiously organized, my soul f; rejoiced in the certainty that, whatever ** interest I had excited in the inestimable cl heart of genius, virtue, and sensibility, “ I owed that precious interest to myself “ alone, wholly independent of theextrane-‘f ous and dazzling advantages of rank and “ fortune. That certainly conveyed a more “ lively throb of rapture to my heart than all that opulence and dignity ever confer-2 K

THE NOVICE OF

ct red upon the ambitious mind of all-ambi-“ tious man. My feelings, my affection, iC my pride, my reason, revelled even to “ delirium in the transporting conviction ; Ct and I almost blessed, while I regretted, cc the interruption which prevented a dis-cc covery that might eventually have de-“ stroyed my boundless confidence.

“ Overcome by numbers, after many “ vain struggles, I found myself in a re-tC mote apartment at the west end of the chateau, and heard the door of my pri-“ son strongly barred and bolted on the “ outside. As the servile crowd who had (i dragged me thither retired, and when I “ was in some degree recovered from the a exhausted state my useless and violent “ exertions had thrown me into, I care-a fully examined the place of my confine-“ ment.

It was a small and ruinous apartment, with one grated window, which hung “ over the Aisne. The prospect it com-“ manded was extensive; the cloudless

ST. DOMINICK.

m

ie light of that beautiful planet, which had “ a few minutes before attracted our ad-“ miring gaze, shone with splendor on “ the distant spires of Epernai; and the “ watch-fires of the royal camp were dis-<c cernable at certain distances. What a “ prospect to a man in whose heart the <l flame of glory was just illumined with u renovated ardour—who, within sight of u his royal commander and brave fellow-soldiers, found himself a prisoner to c< those who would probably make a merit u of delivering him, on bare suspicion, to “ the enemy of his country and his king, “ to gratify their own private pique; and “ thus expose him to danger greater, if possible, than that he had already es-“ caped ! My blood boiled in my veins ; “ my heart beat with an emotion very dif-u ferent from that which a short time be-“ fore had awakened its palpitation: it ‘£ was not the soft wild thrilling pulse of “ love, but the feverish rapid throb of rage, c‘ disappointment, shame, and indignation.

228

THE NOVICE OF

i( With an effort of Herculean strength. t£ borrowed from the energizing- passions “ of the existing moment, I wrenched one “ of the bars from its decayed foundation; c{ and a great part of the framework giv-ct ing way, I found little difficulty in mak-“ ing a breach sufficiently wide to escape <c by. A height of twenty feet scarcely ci presented an obstacle to a spirit wound up to desperation ; and without the he-£C sitation of a moment, I plunged into the “ waves beneath, which seemed to swell “ their moon-light bosoms to receive me: “ but, stunned by my headlong fall, I was “ borne unresisting for a considerable way “ down the stream; then, recovering “ strength and presence of mind, I swam (i to the opposite shore, which brought me “ within a league of the camp, which at i( day-break I reached at the moment 4< that the king at the head of his troops “ was engaged with a numerous squadron “ the enemy were attempting to throw “ into the town ; the defeat of which by

ST. DOMINICK.

229

c< the royalists prevented the siege being “ raised. I arrived in the heat of despe-“ rate action, and, seizing the arms of a wounded soldier, in tiie confusion of the “ engagement got so near the king, as to “ receive in my breast a ball aimed at his ; “ for the scarlet cloke and snowy plumage “ always rendered him an obvious mark. “ Bathed in blood, which stained the wet “ drapery of my drenched habit, 1 fell life-il Jess at my sovereign’s feet. The king “ himself; though believing me to be but “ a private soldier, raised me to his arms;

and was consigning me, with the flatter-“ ing epithet of his saviour, to an officer “ who stood near him; when, raising my “ fast-closing eyes, I perceived that officer “ was my father! I sank in his embrace “ without life or motion.

“ Awakened from my trance by the “ anguish the dressing of my wounds oc-e< casioned, I found myself in the royal “ tent, lying on a couch, surrounded by “ surgeons, and supported by my father’s

230

THE NOVICE OF

c arms, I could scarcely return his warm ‘ and tender embrace, while tears that « flowed from his affectionate and paternal

<	heart fell on my face, and revived my

<	sinking* spirits. When I had swallowed ‘ some cordials, and my wounds were ‘ bound up, I attempted to speak, but t the surgeons imposed silence. 1 found { I was too weak to allow them to extract i the ball without endangering my life, '• which lay almost within a hair’s breadth « of a vital part. I read the mortality of e my wound in the countenance of all 1 who surrounded me ; in the enanguished, c the heart-breaking looks of my father, c I alone traced some gleam of hope ; for 6 when death hovers over the couch of « the child, the parent’s heart is the last { to deny her consolatory illusions.

“ The ball wa3 at last extracted, and 6 for three days my life was despaired of. ‘ On the evening of the fourth, the gan-8 grene irritation of the wound subsided,

* though it was still painful, even to mad-

ST. DOMINICK.

231

“ ness ; and for the first time the surgeons “ pronounced me out of imminent danger; “ but it was not till the expiration of the cc two succeeding days I was suffered to “ satisfy the tender solicitude, the anxious “ curiosity of my father. I related to him “ in a few words my adventures ; and “ when I wished to be most concise was cc most tedious: over my admission at the “ chateau I loitered with imprudent fond-“ ness, and confessed unconsciously what “ I had determined to conceal, that I had “ remained there more than a week. My “ father, fixing a look of penetration on “ my face, asked me my inducement to u remain beneath the roof of one whose “ family had long been at professed va-“ riance with our own, who was bigoted “ in her attachment to the League and u her hatred to the royalists, and whose <É private character and person were as “ disgustful as her public principles were “ odious ; at a period too, when my own “ security, duty, and the anxiety of a

282

THU NOVICE OF

“ father called loudly on me not waste a lt moment in delay? To these natural enquiries 1 returned a hesitating, a C( vague, and equivocal answer; and yet C( my father appeared satisfied. lie then <c informed me, that the king was deeply “ impressed with a sense of what he was <( pleased to term my gallant conduct, ct though he somewhat blamed the impru-<e dence which had led me into the heart c( of the enemy’s camp ; that he had con-“ ferred on me the title of baron de Mon-tC targis, and given my father letters pa-“ tent for the dukedom of Beauvilliers.

“ 6 To crown all,’ said my father, ‘ he “ has laid out for you the most honour-ft able alliance in France, by uniting you ct to the richest protestant heiress in it,

iC the daughter of the duke de V----------.

i( The death of the duke of Parma, and the time taken up by the League in ap-“ pointing a successor, gives his majesty “time to breathe; and he has fixed on ‘* Mantes as his residence, as a place well

ST. DOMINICK.

233

“ calculated by its situation to frustrate ft the machinations of his enemies. Thi-“ ther vve will attend him, and he has done Cf you the honour to appoint you to a situation immediately about his person/ While I lay overwhelmed and motion-ff less by this information, which seemed “ as grateful to my father’s heart as it was wounding to mine, the king himself “ entered, attended only by the baron de “ Rosni, with all that fascinating conde-“ scensiou which so eminently distin-" guishes the most illustrious of monarchs, ,x the most amiable of men. He embraced tf me with the affectionate warmth of a “ father, inquired with tender solicitude “ into the state of my health, flatteringly f< declared he owed his life to what he “ was pleased to term my gallant inter-<c ference, and then repeated all my father had already said. f You know my cha-racier,’ added the king, ‘ sanguine even in trifles; but, when the interest of my “ friends is concerned, impatient as a

THE NOVICE OF

u froward child. I am more shocked a by the delay your illness occasions than “ you can be yourself : yet I am not alto-“ getherso disinterested in your recovery (C as you may suppose ; for, in promoting ‘c your interest, I shall not wholly neglect “ my own/

“ I with difficulty,, but with energy, u assured the king I would willingly de-“ vote my life to his service ; and that could I believe I should be instrumental €t in promoting his happiness or interest, I i( should consider it as too cheaply pur-“ chased with my own ‘ Ventre Saint *' Gris /’ said his majesty^ smiling at the (£ enthusiasm of my manner, heightened cC by the raging lire of a fever that was “ kindling in my veins, ' Venire Saint “ Gris ! I do believe it. Kings must “ share the lot of human nature, and u learn to suffer, were it only to know its ci choicest blessing—to be beloved. Ad-lc versity alone is the touchstone of friend-“ ship. He who is always prosperous

ST. DOMINICK.

235

'• sees the world but on one side. It was “ in the sharpest vicissitudes of fortune, « when I wTas a king without a kingdom, “ a general without an array, a husband “ without a wife ; w hen I was persecuted, “ pursued, oppressed, by a power I vainly opposed, that I found in the mine of “ friendship what was almost an equivalent “ for all Catherine de Medicis would have “ deprived me of.’ The king laid his “ hand on the shoulder of the baron de “ Rosni, and looking in his face with an “ affectionate smile, added: f I shall never “ quarrel with adversity, since it has given “ me so faithful a friend as de Ilosni.’ A u hectic of pleasure, of pride, passed across *< the baron de Rosni’s face; he bowed low “ and said: f Sire, it is a principle with “ your majesty to over-rate the services of Ci others in proportion as you undervalue those illustrious virtues which more than your rank exact them.’

“ The king then adverted to those mea-“ sures requisite to be taken for the se-

236

THE NOVICE Of

“ curity of his crown. Many of the no-“ bility still opposed his endeavours ; and 11 among those of whose fealty he was du-

<c bious was the Duke de V-----. f I have

proposed to him,’ said the king, 4 a union “ between his daughter and the son of “ one of the most stedfast of my adhe-

“ rents. When mademoiselle de V----------

“ is the wife of the baron de Montargis, “ I shall no longer fear for the fealtv of

O	J

a her father. But/ he kindly added, ob-serving the paleness that suddenly over-ie spread my face, ‘ I fear we have ex-*f hausted and wearied our invalid.’ I at-“ tempted to speak, but his majesty, gaily “ putting his hand on my lips, said : “ f Nay, reserve your eloquence for made-

“ moiselle de V------; meantime I shall

“ ofliciate as love’s herald, and hold a “ parley for you, until you are able to ad-“ dress your liege lady in propria persona. “ She attends our little court at Mantes, <e whither I go tc-morrow.’ The king “ then me bade farewell, and retired, fob

ST. DOMINICK.

237

« lowed by de Rosni and my father. The l£ attendants had been previously dis-“ missed when his'majesty’s intention of “ visiting me had been announced, and I “ happily found myself alone at a moment “ when I was so little able to support the “ presence of any human being. When “ the first confused ideas of my agonized ‘‘ mind subsided, I briefly enumerated “ those arguments which reason brought “ forward in favour of a union my heart, “ even though it had been free, would “ have rejected. It was an object to “ which my father’s wish for my aggran-“ disement had long pointed, and which “ now attained, it would be impossible to “ force him to relinquish. It was not only “ the will of my sovereign, but his in-“ terest ; and to be ranked among the “ number of those noble friends who had “ served him, and shared his friendship, “ his esteem, his gratitude ; to be added “ to that honourable and illustrious list of ‘‘ loyal patriots who so willingly sacrificed

238

THE NOVICE OF

“ every private consideration to restore ic peace to their country, to their king his “ just rights ; to find my name enrolled “ with those of the brave Crillon, thege-“ nerous la Noue, the heroic Biron, the Cf prudent, wise, and faithful de Rosni !

Yes, said I, starting from my couch, " I will instantly follow the king, acknow-“ ledge his goodness, accompany him to fi Mantes, and throw myself at the feet of

“ mademoiselle de V------At that mo-

<l ment a paper that lay on the ground caught my eye. I looked on it fer a “ moment : it contained a drawing of Imo-“ gen in the habit of a novice of St. Do-ct minick, and had been done by Theo-<f dore, the page of Montmorell, from <c whom I had purchased it with my harp.

“ This precious shadow had ne’er left “ a bosom where the original reigned om-11 nipotent. From the moment it wras “ mine I had enclosed it. with a few beads dropped from the novice’s rosary, and “ the little poem addressed to the minstrel.

ST. DOMINICK.

239

tC in the minstrel gorget, which, like a “ precious reliquary, I had fastened round “ my neck, and by which they had escaped the waters of the Aisne. Oh, the ta-“ lismanic power of this little picture! I snatched it up, and covered it with " kisses. My father, my king, my bride, “ were all forgotten :	Imogen	reigned

“ alone sovereign of my thoughts ! At “ that instant I heard some one approach, “ and attempted to hide my treasure in its “ little depositary, when to my amaze-“ ment I found it was gone : it had been “ taken from my bosom.

“ While I was searching my couch my “ father entered. Without speaking, he “ eagerly looked round the room, and (s seemed as eagerly employed in searching for something lost as myself; when, ob-“ servingthepicture in my hand,he started. “ Imogen, spare me the repetition of what followed. Suffice it to say, that my fa-“ ther had possessed himself of the gorget, “ and soon became master of the secret

240

THE NOVICE OF

“ of my heart. On the evening’ of that “ day I was seized with a raging delirous “ fever: it had long brooded in my veins: “ the wet clothes 1 had worn for so long “a time after my passage across the “ Aisne, the violent heat which had suc-“ ceeded, together with the irritation of “ my wounds, and the perturbation of my “ mind and passions, reduced me to that “ state which not only threatened my life, but, what is so much more dreadful even “ to think of, my reason. When the ef-" fects of my disorder on my corporeal “ frame were in some degree subsided, “ my distracted father brought me in a “ litter to Paris, where, under the care of “ two eminent physicians, I slowly reco-“ vered my senses and my health. The “ first moment of returning reason was “ that in which I awaked from a deep “sleep. I drew back the curtain of my ** bed, and to my amazement beheld a “ lady richly habited seated by my side. “ She was talking in a low voice to my

ST. DOMINICK.

C{ fatlieF, when turning round her head, “ her eye met mine. I uttered an excla-mation of surprise, and sank on my pillow. This lady was not a stranger ‘‘ to me.”

The baron started as if this confession, had escaped him, and coloured deeply. Imogen’s penetrating eye was fixed on his countenance. That blush was a kindred effusion of one which had stained the baron's cheek when he had mentioned the mystery of his emancipation from the prison of N-------* ; and, by the association

of ideas this recollection awakened, Imogen believed this was the person to whom he owed his deliverance.

The baron continued : " My father, ob-“ serving the intelligence of my looks, “ embraced me tenderly, and with tears “ exclaimed : ' My son ! my beloved son ! “ you are again restored to me ! Come, “ madam/ said he, taking the lady by the “ hand, ‘ share in the happiness which it

VOL. II.	L

242

THE NOVICE OF

“ is yet reserved for you to confirm.’

ce Imogen, this lady was----”

“ Your deliverer from the prison of » N—

The baron hesitated. a You have in-iC deed guessed right,” said he, after a pause and in some confusion ; “ and still “ more, this generous deliver was—ma-

tc demoiselle de V----!”

A death-like paleness overspread the countenance of Imogen. She turned aside her head to conceal her emotion. The baron hung down his, and a long silence ensued. Then in a hurried accent he added : tr But not to intrude longer on your

€t patience, mademoiselle de V----- was

<e an only child, whose will had become “ sovereign from the fatal fondness of her parents, and whose naturally-strong pas-(C sions had been nurtured by boundless “ indulgence. She had been brought up “ in solitude at her father’s chateau in “ Provence. The female attendant most 6‘ in her confidence had been a servant of

ST. DOMINICK.

243

Ci my mother's, and my nurse. She had “ filled the mind of her youthful and c£ credulous mistress with such reports of the perfections of the being she had fostered at her bosom, that the young “ romantic imagination of mademoiselle

“ de V-----became enamoured of a phan-

Cl tom of ideal excellence. She had seen “ me at Paris on my return from England ;

but our parents, then at variance, pre-“ vented an intimacy taking place. We <c met at court and in public. She was “ then, though not beautiful, that is, not “ femininely lovely, not all the wish in wo-“ man, the object of fashionable admira-<s tion. I looked at her with curiosity, i( and she probably construed my observ-“ ation into a warmer sentiment. I left “ Paris, and did not again behold her “ until she effected my deliverance at

tf N----. She was then on a visit there

“ with her maturnal uncle, the governor of the town. Her humanity became “ interested for me ; her spirit was ad-

244

TIIE NOVICE OF

“ venturous, her mind romantic, and her tc Provençal servant, my old attendant, “ perpetually wept my fate in her presence. The governor resided in the “ citadel, whose walls also enclosed the “ prison where state criminals were con-fined. The tower in which I wfas lodged (i hung over a terrace, where, induced by C6 the view it commanded, madame de

“ V-----, attended by her confidant, used

(( sometimes to walk. It was in the still-<c ness of a fine moonlight evening that ‘6 the tones of my harp first caught her ear, “ and from that moment she determined “ on my delivery, which she afterwards so 6( generously effected/’

Here the baron again paused. Imogen’s emotion continuedtoincrease beyondevery effort to subdue or conceal it; while the baron, abruptly starting from a profound reverie, took up the thread of his story in an unconnected manner and in a rapid tone.

“ I recovered, and wrasjust able to go out.

ST. DOMINICK.

245

" when the king arrived at Paris. The dis-<< covery of many factions in the very heart “ of his army, factions which even aimed at “ his life ; the offer of the crown of France “ by the duke de Mayenne to the king of <* Spain; together with the horror of perpe-“ tuating a civil and religious war in the " heart of his country, induced the king to <( embrace the catholic religion ; and even " my father and the baron de Rosni, the (t staunchest hugonots in the kingdom, urged him to it most strenuously, with “ all the most respectable of the nobility of France. My father and myself attend-“ ed his majesty to the church of St. Denis, ie where, surrounded by a multitude, who t( crowded with idolatrous fondness to be-“ hold a monarch who united in his per-“ son the three races of their kings, he “ made his abjuration in form.

Multitudes of voices cried, ‘ Long <f live the king!* and every joyous countenance ratified the sincerity of the prayer.*

(t A pleasant adventure happened me at church.

246

TUE NOVICE OF

The Parisians, who had hitherto sided “ with the League, weary of‘the horrors of rebellion, and convinced that that fac-“ tion, far from having the good of their “ country at heart, were active only to pro-ee mote their own private interests, called “ loudly for peace, and obliged the duke “ de Mayenne to supplicate the king to grant a truce for three months, which “ he willingly did ; and shortly after, the royal hero was received at Paris with “ such acclamations of rapture, that he exclaimed with enthusiastic transport, “ f They are wild to see a king !’ A ge-“ neral pardon was granted to all who had “ taken up arms ; and the greatest order, “ subordination, and propriety, were pre-“ served among the army of the trium-“ pliant royalists, while the king obtained c a more boundless empire over the hearts

an old woman of eighty caught me by the arm and kissed me. I was not the first to laugh at the circumstance. To-morrow you shall sweeten my lip.,> Vide Recueil des Lettres de Henri le Grand à Alad. d'Estrces.

ST. DOMINICK.

247

" of his subjects than royalty alone could “ confer. The vivacity of his temper, the “ brilliancy of his repartees, the conde-“ scension of his manners, rendered him “ the idol of a people to whom such ac-“ complishments bear a magnetic attrac-“ tion. All the principal provinces be-“ trayed an impatmnce to submit them-“ selves to their amiable conqueror; the “ Spaniards, seeing that in the centre “of the kingdom all was lost to them, re-et solved to impede the torrent by some “ unexpected stroke, and laid siege to “ Aix-la-Chapelle. The king did not “hesitate a moment to quit his domestic “ concerns, and instantly left Paris with “ his troops, and some of his principal no-“bility, to prevent the reduction of the “ town. I attended him at the head of my et regiment, as did my father, but unfor-“ tunately, before we arrived, the garrison tc had surrendered to the count de Mans-“ field, the Spanish general.

“ Without giving breathing time to his

24S

TI1E NOVICE OF

“ troops, the king, by way of reprisal, in ff stantly invested Laon ; which by the defeat of the convoy sent to succour it “ must soon submit to his majesty, al-" though the garrison still holds out with “ an obstinate intrepidity that deserves success, though it is impossible it can Cf command it.

The extreme agitation of public af-fairs, and the anxiety with which every one has entered into the interest of the " king, has for the present suspended all €t private considerations in the hearts of “ his adherents. My father, on the com-^ mcncemcnt of the siege, was obliged to “ leave the camp for the province he go-verned: and the king’s favour conferred on his son that high military command “ which he had been obliged to relinquish. “ To this undeserved honour was added the " flattering distinction of being appointed “ one of the hundred who accompanied “ the duke de Biron in his late hazardous “ and successful enterprize. Oh! in this

ST. DOMINICK.

249

“ instance, shall I not become a fatalist in sentiment, and believe it was a happy <( destiny that governed an event which “ threw into my possession such a prize, “ as required more heroism in Scipio to <c resign than to effect the victory which ff made it his ? When, in the horrid tu-mult of the battle, my eyes, dazzled by cc the flying or contending multitude, shocked by the prospect of protracted carnage and human butchery, recoiling from the horrors which blasted their (e glance, turned towards that spot where an intrepid youthful champion, with tf more than mortal courage, defended a prostrate friend, oh ! how little did I think that that champion was the daugh-" ter of the count St. Dorval ! that that lie-“ roic daughter was the timid gentle Imo-“ gen! yet even then my heart’s fond in-“ stinct led me towards the spot your pre-ce sence sanctified ; but the fury of pursuit “ tore me from thee, and I could only “ charge two of my soldiers in thy favour. l 2

£50

THE N(H ICE OF

<f The hurry, the confusion, which ever “ succeeds a fierce engagement, prevented me enquiring for a prisoner who had ex-cited no common interest, and whom I looked on as my own ; for, dreadful to “ think! it wras my interference that saved “ the most invaluable of lives, and changed “ a cruel death into, 1 trust, a mild capti-“ vity.

And now*,” added the baron with a faint smile, I w ill at least grant a truce “ to the patience and flattering attention with which you have honoured a soldier’s plain unvarnished tale, that lost its in-“ terest to the reciter when you ceased to be its theme.” The baron paused; while the name of mademoiselle de V------hover-

ed on the lip of Imogen, her eye seemed to demand why he had turned the most interesting crisis of his detail into the stream of public alTairs, and left his situation

with respect to mademoiselle de V-------

unascertained, to speak of the political state of France. The baron read the in-

ST. DOMINICK.

251

terrogation in the expressive glance which was raised to his face, and added in a tone of hesitation, “ but though, my fair audi-ff tress, I have granted a truce to your pa-tience, I cannot wholly relinquish my claims to it, and if 1 dared to believe, to “ hope, that at a future period”—-e My 'f lord,” repeated Imogen in a tone of mortification, and, rising from her seat, then in a firmer voice added, “I at least can have ct no further claims on your candour. Mo-ff ments like these, to a mind wearied by “ anxiety, are precious. Will you not " suffer me to hope you will use them in ff my favour, by effecting my immediate “ restoration to my suffering father?”

The baron’s colour changed as she spoke ; he paced the tent with rapid steps, while the emotions of his countenance betrayed those internal struggles which agitated a mind divided between contending" passions. As Imogen’s timid eye pursued the motion of the youthful warrior’s graceful form, or marked the pensive gloom

252

THE NOVICE OF

that hung upon his manly brow, and dimmed the lustre of his shining eyes, a profound sigh escaped her lips, in which her father’s fate could claim no share. She again seated herself, and supported her drooping head on the hand that concealed her face. That tender sii»h acted like a

O

spell on the feelings of the baron : lie advanced, and, respectfully taking her hand, fixed his eyes, full of melancholy but reproachful expression, on her half-averted face, and exclaimed, “An immediate res-“ toration ! and are you then, O Imogen ! <c so impatient to leave one who—”

“ My lord,” interrupted Imogen, dis-engaging her hand, and in evident perturbation, ‘"impatience is loo cold a word.” “Well, madam/* said the baron, with an air of moitification mingled with a hauteur that perhaps formed the predominant expression of his countenance and manner, “ we will not dispute about the “ word, when the se?ilime?it is so obvious. “ Reluctant as the count de St. Dorval

ST. DOMINICK.

253

“ may be to owe the recovery of his daugh • ter to a Montargis, every nerve shall be *f strained to effect that eagerly wished-for tc immediate restoration. I go, lady,” continued he, as he put on his helmet and girded on his sword, fr to the tent of his majesty, to inform him of the rich spoil “ the fortune of war lias graced his arms withal, and to learn the fate of his lovely “ captive.” The baron retired, and Imogen almost articulately exclaimed, “ Alas! ff and am I so willingly obeyed !”

Alone and unobserved, the long repressed emotions which had struggled in the bosom of the prisoner rushed over her heart with the overwhelming influence of a torrent, at the moment when it first bursts the barrier that should impede its headlong force. She wept, but each tear of regret could claim a kindred smile of joy; she sighed, but each sigh of apprehension was but prelusive of a thrill of hope. Now his inviolable engagements to the duke de V------floatedon her pensive memory ; and

THE NOVICE OF

now delighted recollection dwelt on those impassionate declarations, those ardent looks, those warm professions and tender sighs, which so eloquently declared that in this alliance of policy and parental ambition the heart had no share, and that the captive daughter of the count de St. Dor-val still maintained the empire won by the novice of St. Dominick. " And yet,” thought Imogen, <f what obscurity, what mystery, hovered over the conclusion of “ his narrative Î and though he touched <f with so much modest carelessness on

fe the partiality of mademoiselle de V___,

“ how obviously did those slight but rnark-'f ing traits of her character and conduct fC evince the tenderness, the fidelity, the c( heroism, of her romantic passion ! ‘ Ena-moured of a phantom of ideal excel-<( lence !’ Oh no ! her love was founded in fC nature, in sentiment, in reason; it was (C the homage of the heart to virtue, in

o	;

€S virtue’s noblest form; it was a lively, a profound consciousness of the inestima-

ST. DOMINICK.

255

“ ble worth of goodness united to genius, <f taste, and knowledge; it was a love so f< sanctioned, that to have felt it was ai-ft most to partake of the excellence which gave it birth." It was thus the heart of Imogen borrowed a suffrage for its own weakness, by excusing that of another,

and attributing to mademoiselle de V---

all she herself had experienced.

Then reverting again to her rival, she continued :	And	it	was	reserved	for	thee,

tc O happy and amiable woman ! to pro-“ tect and save the idol of your affections ; “ the saviour of his forfeit life, his libe-(f rator from captivity, his tender attendant in sickness; but it rests in the “ generous and grateful heart of Montargis fr to reward thee for these acts of love !’■ The sense of her own empire over that heart faded into despondency at this conviction the sophistry of her fears had adduced ; and she beheld the baron de Montargis the happy husband of the enviable de V-----; ^ while I/’ she continued,,

THE NOVICE OF

25G

<f still wandering hopelessly on in love's <f dreary pilgrimage, faithful though af-“ dieted, constant though deceived, shall waste the spirit of youth in chill despon-“ dency, then die without the hope of surviving my existence in the memory of him for whom alone 1 lived !" It is the peculiar property of delicate and refined minds, united to lively and ardent imaginations, to enjoy more bliss from fancied happiness than human reality can confer, and to suffer more from ideal woes than human calamities can impose. The sufferings of Imogen were of the heart and imagination, and they were insupportable. Abandoning herself to the influence of her emotion, she folded her arms on the table, and, reposing her head on them, wept the fate her own fancy had conjured up. At that moment the baron entered; he started as he observed her attitude and agitation. The pride of Imogen recoiled from the discovery of her weakness, and she strove to disguise it beneath an af-

ST. DOMINICK.

257

fected indifference and haughtiness of manner. She dried her eyes, and arose witli an air of graceful dignity. The baron, taking her hand, looked with tender anxiety on her face, and with a faint and affectionate voice exclaimed, In tears, “ Imogen ?” “A tear, I believe, my “ lord,” said Imogen, with a forced smile, “ is no unusual guest in the eye of a cap-“ tive.” <f And do you feel yourself a “ captive, lady ?” reproachfully demanded the baron. I am not insensible to your “ goodness/’ said Imogen, with assumed firmness, “but I feel I am a child divided “ from a suffering father, who at this mo-“ ment may require all a child's solicitude “ and care." At her father’s name the full heart of Imogen again sent tears to her eyes.

“Imogen/’ said the baron, relinquishing her hand, and in great perturbation,

do not make me hate thy virtues—do not “ force me to believe that a new-formed “ affection for a being whose very exist-

THE NOVICE OF

<( cnce buta few days back was unknown to thee, supersedes every other senti-“ ment, every other feeling in your bosom.

“ Let a friendship once so candidly avow* ed, so solemnly pledged, a compassion once so freely granted,, still maintain “ some influence in that all-filial heart.

“ Once, O Imogen ! you agreed with me that collateral ties were not all sufficient “ to fill up the heart’s aching void.0

To this Imogen made no reply ; her harassed spirits were unable to resist the force of her feelings, and she only, and in a faint voice, demanded if his embassy to the king had been crowned with success ? The baron threw himself into a chair beside her, and replied : ^ As I suspected,

“ my application for this evening was too Cf late. The king has been labouring all Cf day in the trenches like a common sol-“ dier, in order to encourage and animate <c his men, who look up to him equally for " example and reward. The baron de Ie Rosni has at last prevailed on him to

ST. DOMINICK.

259

“ retire to rest ; and, aftertwo nights spent “ in watching and anxiety, he has fallen “ into a profound sleep, and for this night “ it would be impossible to obtain an au-{l dience. 1 regret the circumstance on your account, although it could avail <f little more than soothing your impa-tience; for the evening is far advanced, “ and until to-morrow nothing could be iC done.” Imogen bowed her head, and answered only with a sigh of very equivocal birth. She was not glad to be detained from her father, but she was not sorry to enjoy a little longer the society of one from whom perhaps she was about for ever to be severed.

The baron, gazing on the heaviness of her fine eyes and the paleness of her cheeks, said, with tender solicitude, as he arose, Let thy heart for this night rest in “ peace, for thy harassed nature demands “ repose ; the heaviness of fatigue beyond “ thy strength to bear hangs upon thy " brow, and fades the roses on thy cheek.

TUE NOVICE OF

Within the limits of this tent, unmeet indeed for such a guest, safety shall shield thee, and preserve this spot sa-cred to thee from the violation of every t( intruder. My station lies within view of this honoured tent, and I shall guard “ my illustrious prisoner with no small “ circumspection.”

Then bowing on her hand, and gracefully paying the salutation of the night, he retired. He had scarcely left her, when the two females who had attended her in the morning presented themselves; and having brought in tapers, and arranged a couch in the inward division of the tent, they offered their services to Imogen to assist her in undressing, which she thankfully declined, and was again left to herself. The first wild tumult of her thoughts had subsided into a train of more calm consideration, and the extreme fatigue of mind and spirits which she had undergone soon lulled the irritation of her feelings, and overpowered the influence of her emo-

ST. DOMINICK.

£61

tions. The first night-watch had not relinquished his station at the entrance of the tent, when the sufferings of the past, the anxieties of the future, and the reflections of the present, were buried in the soft oblivion of profound repose.

CHAP, XVII.

L’art devin de peindre l’esprit à l’esprit.

J. J. RoU6SEACt.

The High conltniinion of superior minds,

Akexside.

THE sun rode high in the horizon before Imogen left a couch over which the spirit of repose seemed to shed its choicest gifts : calm and undisturbed had been her sleep, and fancy's fairest spell conjured up the fairest visions of joy to the dream of her rest ; the cares, the anxieties, the turbulent emotions of the preceding day were lulled into forgetfulness in the grateful sensation of renovated strength and recruited spirits; health blushed on her cheek and sparkled in her eye, and the tone

THE NOVICE OF

2G2

of her mind and feelings were well calculated to banish dejection, convert languor into vivacity, and open the soul to the visitation of hope, of joy, of love.

Fresh from the duties of her simple toilet, she entered the outer apartment, where an elegant breakfast was spread that seemed to come ‘f with a wish, and with a u wish retired.” The drapery of the tent, drawn aside to admit the fragrance of the morning air, discovered to the eye the splendid spectacle of the whole army drawn out on an extensive plain, while a number of fine military bands filled the air with strains of martial music, the unclouded sun poured a flood of radiance over the animated scene, and the arms of the soldiers brilliantly reflected back the beams which played on their points.

High above the innumerable military commanders which strewred the plain, attired in all the “ dread magnificence” of war, the ponderous casque, shining faul-chion,invulnerable breast-plate, and pliant

ST. DOMINICK.

263

cuirasses, the graceful form of the colonel of the king’s life guards, the baron de Mon-targis, towered in lofty eminence, and the round full tones of his deep and mellow voice distinctly vibrated amidst the wild variety of sound that assailed the ear of his prisoner; while her fond and searching glance soon discovered him amidst the gaudy multitude, the hero of an army of heroes : even the lion port” of majesty, though surrounded by all the insignia of royal rank, passed on unheeded. lier eye, the obedient organ of her soul, took in no object save that which governed its every feeling ; and her ear, the faithful passage to her heart, received no sound but that which alone and ever awakened its liveliest thrill of bliss. Never, indeed, was a form more calculated to fascinate the imagination of genius, and lend to poetry and painting the finest model of youthful heroism personified, than that of the baron de Montargis in his military habit, which, splendid, graceful, and characteristic, was

364

THE NOVICE OF

admirably adapted to the majesty of mien, the dignity of air, and that animated expression of countenance and Roman outline of features, which eminently distinguished his person, and gave him to the enamoured eye, the fervid and glowing fancy, of Imogen as a being of a higher sphere,

“ On whom each god had set his seal,

“ To give the world assurance of a man.”

When the troops dispersed, and she beheld the baron struggling through the crowd to approach her tent, his plumy crest waving in the breeze above the inferior multitude that surrounded him, her heart beat with a velocity that would have mocked the calculation of medical skill to ascertain ; pleasure swam in her eye, blushed on her cheek, and shed its bright illumination over every feature of her animated face, to which the rapturous irritation of her feelings gave a marked and sweet expression.

With a rosy confusion of manner, and a smile playful though artless, she advanced

ST. DOMINICK.

265

to meet her amiable conqueror. He pressed the hand held out to him to his lips, and gazed in silent delight on the insinuating naïveté of her air and the Fresh-ness of her beauty's renovated bloom.

“ Certainly/’ said he, as he seated himself by her, “ you have been on such an " embassy as Psyche was invested with by “ Venus when she received from Proser-“ pine a casket of blushes, blooms, and “ graces, enchanting looks and sovereign “ smiles ; but that you have betrayed your ff trust, and reserved for yourself those “ treasures intended for the deity whom ff you resemble.”

C( What, my lord,” said Imogen gaily, and contemplating his warlike appearance, “ a soldier and a courtier! gallant in the “ chamber as the field, with a device on “ your shield like that of Alcibiades, a “ Cupid playing with thunderbolts/’

<c But with this difference,” said the baron emphatically, “ that the treacherous “ urchin has turned his arms against my-VOL. II.	m

THE NOVICE OF

266

ts self, instead of pointing them at my e< foes; and yet he knows the moderation “ of my desires, and that the rich plunder C( of one inestimable heart is all the spoil “ my utmost ambition pants to possess.” The baron fixed a smiling but impassioned glance on Imogen’s face, who, in blushing confusion, and sensible of the delicacy of her situation, which the weakness of her heart rendered doubly obvious, endeavoured to give an indifferent turn to the conversation, and spoke of the pleasure she had received from the late splendid spectacle she had witnessed.

Yes,” said the baron, “the profession cc of a soldier wears a very attractive aspect “ to those who only behold it in its holi-“ day garb, in all its splendid panopty, <c divested of its vicissitudes, its horrors, “ and its sufferings. I remember, when *• a boy, being present, for the first time, “ at a review held by Henry the Third at “ Fontainblcau. My senses, my imagi-“ nation, were captivated, dazzled; mili-

bT. DOMINICK.

267

“ lary enthusiasm instantly plumed her “ rapid wing, and wandered through such “ scenes of bright illusion performed such “ feats of supernatural courage and god-<£ like heroism as romance lo\es to design i( and fancy to colour with her brightest “ tints. I burnt my Demcsthenes for be-“ ing less eminent in the field than the (i rostrum, and abandoned Horace as a “ coward, to be destroyed by moths and “ must: while the Achilles of Homer and 6C the Eneas of Virgil, with a few preux “ chevaliers of modern date, became my “ study and my models. But, alas! a few “ years’ military experience faded the “ glowing tints my imagination had shed “ over the picture. 1 saw that the laurels t£ which fame flung over the path of vie-cc tory did but conceal his footsteps’ bloody £É track, and that the heart of humanity, “ of reason, groaned in anguish over those “ deeds which gave immortality to the u name of the hero. I saw the ambition t( of a few, the scourge of millions; and

268

THE NOVICE OF

u I beheld the warrior in his splendid u career overturning the rights» the liber-<c ties, and happiness of mankind, and <l obtaining a deathless name for having u desolated and laid waste the fairest trea-i{ sures in the moral and natural world.”

“ But I am sure,” said Imogen, delighted with such sentiments from the lips of one who was yet in the heyday of valour-ous enthusiasm ; <c I am sure that even on the list of conquest there are many “ names to be found who tempered mag-“ nanimity with moderation and courage “ with humanity.”

“ I hope and believe there are';” said the baron; “ but partial instances are not an “ overbalance for the effects of a general <c and radical evil.”

" It is not every one,” said Imogen with a smile, “ who has the courage to reveal and acknowledge the faults of “ his mistress.”

“ War is not my mistress,” said the

ST. DOMINICK.

269

baron, “ but my affianced bride, from “ whom I cannot in honour retreat, though £* inclination be as sharp as it ivill.**

The strong allusion which this carelessly-uttered figure bore to the real state of the baron’s more intimate engagements ► truck with the force of electricity not only on his o wn apprehension but on that of Imogen. Both changed colour under the

O	O

influence of kindred emotion, and both were for a moment confused and silent. The baron, recovering his presence of mind, at last gaily exclaimed : “ But a “ truce with war and all its horrors at a (t moment when nothing but peace and “ joy should be the subjects of disquisi-“ tion : it is time for me to ask my lovely <c guest if the soldier’s rough couch and “ the noisy bustle of a camp allowed her “ that repose her weariness demanded ?”

“ Yes, my lord,” said Imogen, gladly catching his gaiety, “ such profound re-“ pose as might rival Epimenides’s sleep of half a century.”

270

THE NOVICE OF

“ Then perhaps,” said he, ff you also Cf possess the skill of* Epimenides in ex-<c plaining dreams ; and were I (o discover “ those which hovered in my fancy while “ I snatched a transient sleep on my post last night—but perhaps 'twere as well “ to conceal them. The dreams of the “ heart are often fatal to its peace/' Imogen involuntarily echoed back the half-checked sigh that issued from the baron's lips ; then eagerly asked if he had obtained an audience of the king.

“ No," he replied ; “ I have only be-held his majesty in the field, where he has been reviewing his forces since the “ morning dawn : but," said he, rising,

“ if you desire it I will instantly endea-<f vour to see him."

“ I entreat it," said Imogen earnestly; and the baron, though with an air of reluctance, withdrew to obey her commands.

As he left the tent, part of the curtain that skreened its entrance remained undrawn, and admitted the dazzling beams of

ST. DOMINICK.

271

the sun, which played on the polished surface of a small cabinet that filled a corner of the tent. She approached to admire its curious workmanship, when accidentally laying her hand on one of the panned it flew open, and she found it was a little portable library filled with books all in duodecimo size. This was a pleasing surprise : it was like meeting a circle of friends in a strange land. She had looked with eager curiosity and delight into above twenty volumes before the baron returned ; yet so short was his absence, that she started to find him at her side before she thought he*had reached the royal tent.

“I have again (o regret,” said he, "the “ ill-success of my embassy,” while the triumphant smile that played on his lip might well bring the sincerity of that regret into question. “ A cessation of arms ,f agreed on between the besiegers and " the besieged,” continued he,Cf has given " the king a holiday, and he has left the

TJIE NOVICE OF

Ci camp above an hour back, attended by “ some of his principal officers; and “ though the impatient anxiety may rc-“ g ret the event, the refined delicacy of “ your sentiments will approve its cause, “ when I inform you that this amiable “ monarch, more to be loved as a man “ than even revered as a hero, is gone “ to visit a small house in the Forest of (i Folambray, where when a boy he had “ been regaled with fruit and new milk, <l and he now promises himself a sweet “ though melancholy satisfaction, known H only to superior minds, in visiting those <É scenes so familiar to him in the happy ‘‘ dawn of existence, and endeared to his (l heart by the fond recollection of many <f pleasant boyish incidents and youthful “ sports, ill exchanged for the busy cares “ and more important trifles of riper but “ less felicitous years.”

“Oh!” said Imogen, ec 1 can indeed “ forgive the cause, though the effects are

ST. DOMINICK.

273

<c so destructive to my present wishes.

How natural to court even the returning <c shadow of those sweet and lively emo-<c tions which usher in every incident in “ the first sunny era of life, when all is “ new and grateful to the unsated senses, <c and the unpractised feelings are trem-“ blingly alive to every sweet impression. (£ Restrained and limited as were the plea-(C sures of my childhood, yet nature, rich “ in her own resources, shed many aguile-“ less joy on my heart, which even now “ throbs with the recollection of its infan-“ tine delights, and experiences in each “ departed day the death of sweet sensa-“ tion, which can never, never return.”

<( But which,” said the baron, cfmaybe <( succeeded by a sweeter. O Imogen ! “ the pleasures of childhood are but negative; his insensibility, not enjoyment ; £f the fancy revels, but the heart lies still ; « the senses are amused, but the senti-<cment is yet dormant; and the profound m 2

274

THE NOVICE OF

44 source of bliss, where nature sums up 44 all her joys in one, is still reserved for 44 life’s maturer era, when the powers of 44 the soul, the imagination, and the heart, 44 are all awakened into rapturous exist-4t ence.”

The bajon took Imogen’s hand as he spoke, who, evading the dangerous theme he seemed anxious to prolong, said, as she disengaged her trembling hand: c< There 44 is something so cross in your thus miss-“ ing the king, my lord, a second time, 4‘ that 1 am tempted to believe there is 44 some fatality hanging over my capti-“ vity ;or haply,” she added with a smile, “ like other distressed damsels in the days 44 of chivalry, I am under the spell of some u powerful enchanterAt the word enchanter Imogen colored, and a glance at the baron’s countenance covered her with confusion.

44 If,” said he laughingly, “ there is a 44 spell in the question, Jtis I only who am

ST. DOMINICK.

275

“ under its influence. Would to heaven that spell was indeed of mutual force,

“ and that the sorceress who exerted, be-“ came the sufferer of her own art ! I be-a lieve, in spite of the Mosaic law and “ the capitularies of Charlemagne, I cc should suffer the loitch to live, and even “ steal my own existence from her’s.” Imogen was at that moment still standing near the book-cabinet, and now turned over the leaves of a volume she held in her hand with great eagerness, as if wholly intent on the occupation : “ But, <f I fear,” said the baron, after a minute’s silence, “ that I intrude. When I as-u sured you this tent should be an inviola-u ble sanctuary, I did not mean to secure “ a saving clause in my own favour. ‘‘ Shall I leave you,” said he, “ in the u midst of society which will at least af-u ford you entertainment, though I fear ‘‘ not much instruction ?”

“ Sulfer me then,” said Imogen with

276

THE NOVICE OF

an insinuating smile, “ to enjoy your iC society, from which I shall derive r< both.**

The baron bowed with a look of proud and gratified feeling.

tC I believe,” continued Imogen, “ I should apologize for this apparent breach of trust, but the door of the ca-“ binet flew open to my touch; and to “ confess the truth, I was as much pleased <( to examine its contents as amazed to “ find such a treasure among the camp “ equipage of a military commander. “ How few, amidst the tumult of warfare, “ the dissipation of a military life, would “ find leisure for intellectual improve-“ ment, or cherish a taste for literary pur-“ suit !’*

‘‘ And yet,” said the baron, " my sweet €t flatterer, lam afraid that such an appen-ei dage in a tent wears rather an air of “ foppery, for even the gravest pursuit has “ its fopperies; but to confess the truth.

ST. DOMfNICK.

277

“ early habits of study have so methodized into principle, that on the score of self-“ denial I should have more merit in re-<f linquishing my books than retaining <f them as the constant companions of my “ public as well as my private life. I may “ say, with the elegant Pliny, that fthey IC feast my soul with a voluptuousness which is never followed by disgusts ;* “ and though my leisure to enjoy them is “ limited, yet it is wonderful how many “ odd minutes and half-hours lie heavy on one’s hands even in the most active pro-“ fessions, which a book delightfully and usefully occupies. Apropos of Pliny, “ whose charming letters I have so often “ seen in your hands at Montmorell in ff the original. Here is the first French “ translation of him we hear of ; and what " renders it doubly interesting, in spite of " its obsolete style, is, that it was made by “ the beautiful duchess of Burgogne, niece tf to the cardinal de Bologne, in conjunc-

THE NOVICE OF

“ tion with our unfortunate king John, “«so long the prisoner of the illustrious “ Edward the Third of England.”

“ Interesting indeed !” said Imogen, eagerly taking the book from his hands ; “ and it reflects no little honour on our “ sex that the duchess was among the c‘ earliest revivers of letters at a period of tc literary darkness, when the unhappy “ royal John, with all his passion for f< books, could not collect above twenty “ volumes in his library ’’

ff But we must not let this charming “ duchess engross all the merit/* said the baron, drawing out a small volume; “for ,r here are some charming poems by her “ fair cotemporary, Jane of Bourbon, wife “ of Charles the E ifth ; whoengaged Philip “ de Vitri the beloved friend of Petrarch, lf to translate into French verse the Meta-*f morphoses of Ovid How could Pe-“ trarch at that very period give us the “ name of barbarians, when France boast-

- - * * • *•



•	•* t

— • 4

• #■••>-

W y* •» -,*.-♦ • ■* W»li

* O— ^	►	•	*

*•	.	*	t t •

9* ' NI» U«» «	•—*

—	•	V	n* - «• r ■

. 4 MflJ

2S0

THE NOVICE OF

to whom fancy and common sense are “ much indebted: the one is chastened, €t corrected, and restrained, by his judg-ff ment; the other restored to his place in ff the empire of imagination.”

“ I have read but few romances,” said Imogen; ‘'those few which the library of “ Montmorell supplied did not induce me “ to wish to extend my studies in that line. “ I remember being heartily weary of the (( wild tales of Diargue, the disciple of Ariosto, and not much interested in the <c wonderful histories of Leuceppe and “ Clitophon, or the romantic loves of <f Theagenes and Charicles.’*

“ Which last,’* said the baron, “ is in “ fact the progenitor of the whole fan-€< tastic species of romance. Strange to s< say, it was the work of a holy father, <f the sage Ileliodorus, bishop of Irecas; " and so enamoured was the pious divine <f of his literary bantling, that, when con-demned by a most gothic synod either i( to suppress his book or resign his epis~

ST. DOMINICK..

281

ff copal honours, he (in (he true spirit of f< authorship) preferred the latter, and sa-“ crificed the mitre for the bays, the cro-sier for the pen.”

He is not, I believe,” said Imoger, ft the only sacred author romance can boast of in her service. I remember when first I caraeto Montmorell, Thec-“ dore, the young* page, (who was deeply " read in romantic lore,) lent me the Feats of Charlemagne the Great, by “ the archbishop Turpin; containing many wonderful exploits and supernatu-i( ral deeds performed by the emperor be-“ fore the walls of Narbonne. At first, “ my young and untutored imagination.. ff was captivated by this species of fiction ; “ but as my judgment matured, not even “ the sanctity of the author was sufficient “ to awaken any interest to a recapitula-,f tion of extraordinary adventures, which " shocked probability without amusing the “ mind ; of extravagant actions, not even " the licence of romance should tolerate ;

THE NOVICE OF

ct while the high-wrought virtues of their '• all-perfect heroines and supernatural he-roes put my patience sadly to the test,, “ and never failed to exhaust my attention.

In fact, I believe nothing can be less “ sublime than my taste ; for, beyond the “ boldest flights of extravagant fancy or “ eccentric genius, I prefer those works “ whose mild and natural fictions touch “ the heart, and call its sweetest feelings ‘Mnto being; those simple stories which “ unfold a series of events, such as life's “vicissitudes may eventually display; “ where the characters strongly drawn, “ but not over-wrought, are placed in in-“ teresting situations ; and where the “ warm, the tender affections of the heart “ form the ground-work of the piece.”

“ Yes,” said the baron with a sigh, and fixing his delighted eyes on the face of Imogen, “ my charming critic, you are “ right : it is on the heart alone we are all <c dependent for life’s best blisses; reason iS may degenerate into sophistry, fancy

ST. DOMINICK.

283

il into delusion, but the heart, the heart is the infallible, the immutable guide to " supreme felicity : and yet its vicissitudes “ are dreadful ; but its joys, its full abun-“ dant joys—Oh! who would not endure f* its sufferings for an age to enjoy its blisses but for an hour!”

“ I must confess,” said Imogen, smiling, “ lam not one of those enthusiastic epi-te cures in bliss.”

" You ! you ! Imogen,” exclaimed the baron, seizing both her hands, and gazing ardently on her ; then suddenly letting them fall, he added, Alas! thou knowest not <f what thou art, the profound emotion of “ which thou art capable ; for thy heart, I Ci fear, lies yet unconscious of its riches!” Imogen, more confused by the manner in which these words were uttered than their purport, turned to the cabinet, and, taking down another volume, said, ‘f What have we got here? Petrarch ? How much “I regret my ignorance of the Italian “ language, since it now prevents me sa-

284

THE NOVICE OF

u tisfying a curiosity so long indulged. “ Pray, my lord, was not this far-famed u writer the most ardent, the most con-<f stant, the most unfortunate of lovers ?”

“ I believe,” said the baron, smiling at the romantic simplicity of the question, and the naïveté with which it was demanded, “ I believe, if you had given him the “ epithet of the most j)oetical3 it would be “ at least as just as any you have honoured “ him with, for I have always thought that “ neither his amatory joys or sorrows were “ of the heart : indeed, if I recollect right, he somewhere acknowledges himself, <f ‘ that it was requisite he should be un-“ happy ; for, had his love been propi-s< tious, we should have had no charming plaintive sonnets ; and 1 believe he would “ rather have resigned his mistress than his ct muse, and served the lady de Sade as the bishop dc Irecas did his episcopacy. It tf is to his unhappy passion he owes his “ immortality; this he foresaw: his love “ sonnets will carry down his name to

ST. DOMINICK.

2$j

“ ages yet unborn, while his polemical and “ other works survived not his own actual “ existence ; and yet to me his passion “ for Laura, all-forcible as he delineates u its effects, appears a mere paradox — u How could he choose her as the rnis-et tress of his soul, who was incapable of “ becoming the companion of his mind ? “ Laura, like many ladies of the first rank iC in her day, was so profoundly ignorant “ as not either to read or write, and spent “ her life in a circle of un-ideaed women “ at her loom or her embroidery: and (< what influence can mere unintelligent (t beauty obtain over such a heart as a ‘‘ man of Petrarch’s genius and learning il must have possessed? Tell me, my sweet friend, is not a sympathy of taste, “ sentiment, and pursuit, the surest foun-« dation for the tenderest, noblest, purest, “ love ?”

ie I should think so," said Imogen, faintly colouring.

“ And I feel it,” said the baron cm-

286

THE NOVICE OF

phaticalJy: “ the wonderful influence of mind over female charms, and the pas-“ sions they are capable of awakening, is “ scarcely yet understood in this half-“ gothic day ; while man is even still " struggling with I he prejudices, the ig-ct norance, of those barbarous ages which 6< succeeded to the all-illuminated day of a wisdom, knowledge, and science; vvo-<c man, satisfied in the omnipotence of her “ beauty, neglects to assert those claims “ on intellectual graces which can alone cc confirm her empire over the understand-(C ing, exalt her influence over the senses, « and render the charms of her mind se-66 ducing as those of her person.”

*' But is there not something Utopian u in this sketch of what female empire umight become?” said Imogen, with a smile:	is	it	not	a	theory more beautiful

“ than practicable ?”

If you can indeed entertain such a “ doubt,” said the baron, “ I can only “ say that you are yourself the best proof

ST. DOMINICK.

287

“ of the fallacy of your own sceptic posi-“ tion. But, lest you should object to a il solitary exception in general assertion, “ I can at least bring classic authority to “ vindicate my hypothesis.

“ In Greece, where beauty was deified, “ and the countless altars of the all-sub-“ duing goddess smoked with the inces-“ sant offerings of the most ardent vota-“ rists, woman was still taught to appre-“ ciate the powers of mind, (even those “ whose profession was but to charm the ic senses;) loveliness and intelligence were almost inseparably connected, as she “ who conquered by her beauty confirmed her empire by her wit. Aspasia came tl to Athens to teach eloquence from the u lip of love. Socrates and Pericles be-came her pupils : the former imbibed “ the philosophia amatoria at the feet of “his intelligent preceptress ; and thelat-“ ter, enamoured of her intellectual rt charms, made her his wife. Epicurus, (/.who studied ease of mind too much to

2SS

THE NOVICE OF

submit to the vicissitudes of passion, u was lured into attachment for his pupil “ Leonsium, by the persuasive Attic clc-

gance of her literary works and conver-€: sation ; and it was not the mere perso-ff nal attractions of Pythias, the wife of “ Aristotle, which induced him to wish she St could be deified, and receive the same €< worship as was paid to the goddess “ Ceres.”

fc If,” said Imogen, “ I was so excel-Si lent a sophist as to controvert truths c< which are morally undeniable, I am yet “ too much a woman to wish to deny a “ single assertion which could extend, even “ in the least degree extend, the empire “ of my sex. But Petrarch ! what would ce have become of the unfortunate Pe-t( trarch had the mind of Laura equalled “ her person ?”—“ He had not then lived “ to sing his woes,” said the baron, “ but “ had died in their endurance : and yet fc from the first eraof his passion hedespair-ct cd of obtaining its object; for she was vir-

ST. DOMINICK.

289

(i tuous, and the faithful wife of another.,> —“And can love survive hope ?” asked Imogen earnestly.—“ I fear it can/' sighed the baron.—“ But not if pride and reason “ exert their powers/' returned Imogen r< with animation.

“ Ah, Imogen ! is pride always victo-“ rious in the combat with affection, or “ the chill declamation of reason persua-“ sive as the eloquence of the heart ?”

“ Not, my lord, if we are determined td “listen to the heart only; if we are en-te amoured of the disorder and reject a “ cure, as those who cherish weakness to <c excite pity ; or if we fancy our case “ desperate, when we are not even in “ danger.”

“ That is, my fair casuist, you think “ the heart is as liable to hypocondriæ as “ the body.”

“ Exactly.”

“ Ah, Imogen ! it is for you only who “ are in rude health, to talk lightly of that “ disease which shakes the invalid to dis-

VOL. II.	N

THE NOVICE OF

"solution. In the words of a divine " English poet:

“ He jests at scars who never felt a wound.”

The baron, fixing his eyes on Imogen’s face, sighed and shook his head.

" But we arc forgetting Petrarch, my te lord. Though you quarrel with him as

cc a lover, yet as a poet---”

u As a poet, and an amatory one, Pe-cc trarch stands almost unrivalled; will you 6t give me leave to introduce him to you <c as such, through the medium of a very €C indifferent translation ?” He then presented Imogen a chair, and seating himself beside her, translated, in very poetical language, Petrarch’s beautiful sonnet of lC Dubii cnnorosiyet he seemed rather to recite from memory than to read; to utter the spontaneous effusions of his own heart than of another’s imagination; for, while liis eloquent lips did ample justice to the tender self-inquiries of the doubtful lover, bis more eloquent eyes, beaming full on bis auditress, illustrated the sensations he

ST. DOMINICK.

291

described, and twice lie repeated the impassioned exclamation,

“ O viva morte ! 0 dillitoso male,

“ Corné puo tante in me—Sio no’l consento ?’*

^itli a sensibility of voice, an energy of manner, that spoke the perfect consonance of the sentiment with his own feelings. The pause which succeeded was eloquence itself ; Imogen was the first to dissolve the spell of dangerous silence. Gently drawing the book from his hand, she replaced it with a volume of Torquato Tasso, then with an air of playfulness said, " Were I “ Tasso, I should be sadly jealous of this “ monopolizing Petrarch.”

“ Confess/' said the baron, seizing her hand, are yon most anxious I should “ change the theme or the book?"

“ Both, both," said Imogen :	to-day

“ I am governed by the very soul of whim, ce and should have run through the Alex-“ andrian library with as much rapidity as “ I am running through yours.”

“ Come, then, my charming Capricio, I

292	THE	NOVICE	OF

“ will read at' random the very page you “ have opened.” It was the beautiful sonnet “ Se d'Icaro Icggesle e di Fetonte, $c. 8$c” and he read it with peculiar spirit and animation. ' “ You see/' said he, closing the book, “ these Italians live but to love, and make the object of their if lives the theme of their writings/’

“ We must believe it indeed,” said Imogen ; “ if Petrarch and Tasso are the f‘ just representations of their country-f{ men, there is apparently, by this little “ specimen, a strong coincidence in their “ sentiments and writings.”

“ And in their lives a still stronger. i{ Tasso, like Petrarch, was early in life “ forced to fly his native place, by the fac-“ lion which disturbed it ; and found a <c patron in Alphonso, the second duke of Ferrara, as did Petrarch in Coligni, and Ci in the accomplished Leonora D'Fste a “ Laura; but something more fortunate iC as a poetical inamorato. His sonnets “ have more of the tire of love than its

ST. DOMINICK.

293

t6 pathos; yet his passion for the charming “ princess D’Este was the efficient cause “ of all the sufferings that pursued his “ chequered life : but he was beloved,, and “ that sweet conviction was an imperish-“ able source of felicity, of which even “ his enemies could not deprive him.5’

“ 1 think I recollect the lady Magde-“ laine saying,’' returned Imogen, ‘f she •< was at the court of Charles the Ninth 14 when Tasso was introduced there by 44 Luigi, the cardinal legate.”

“ Yes,” 6aid the baron, lf it reflects <f one solitary beam of light upon the shadowy character of Charles, that he was sensible to the powers of genius. “ He received Tasso with the most fiat-“ tering encomiums, and on his interces-ff sion pardoned a poet condemned to u death for some heinous crime.”

We are so much the creatures of edu-<f cation, that ’tis possible, my lord, even Charles owed more of his vices to the “ example and precepts of those who sur-

THE NOVICE OF

29*

“ rounded him, than to the innate vi-<f ciousness of his own disposition ; let us “ at least hope it, for the honour of hu-“ man nature.”

“ And you may add of learning and “ taste ; for Charles was by no means de-“ ficient in either. I believe he ranks “ among our royal authors ; if his treatise on hunting can be allowed as a sufli-“ cient claim on the honours of author-“ ship.”

(t Well, shall we go on with the ama-et tory effusions of Tasso, or reconnoitre “ the charms of Italian prose ? Here is a tf collection of charming novelettes by Bandello.” He then (wholly intent on amusing his prisoner) read through the interesting tale from whichShakspeare has taken the happiest of his dramas, Romeo and Juliet. When he had finished, Imogen, the most animated of auditors, expressed her opinion of the story with justness and taste, and thanked the baron with expressions of the 'warmest approbation for his spirited and elegant translation.

ST. DOMINICK.

295

" If indeed/* said the baron, ff this <f very loose translation possessed the merit ‘f you so flatteringly ascribe to it, I should fC have been less indebted for my inspira-<f tion to the author than my auditress, “ on whose patience I fear I have made “ very exorbitant demands ; but” (with a sigh he added,) tf hours such as these are rarely sent, and the regret I should ft feel in being now obliged to relinquish “ the happiness they conferred w'ould be •f less poignant, if 1 dared to encourage “ the hope that they would this evening “ return. That trumpet’s shrill blast calls me to the duties of my profes-“ sion ; and an' engagement to dine in “ the tent of the duke de Biron will give “ me a tedious interval of uninteresting “ existence, whose apathy shall heighten, by contrast, those animated and elegant “ enjoyments reserved for happier mo-“ ments. Dare I,” he added in a supplicating tone tc reckon on the return of

296

THE NOVICE OF

C6 these precious moments, so dear to the “ heart, the fancy, and the mind ?”

Imogen, with great modesty, but with that air of peculiar naivetê which was all her own, and which ever gave point to her manners when her heart was interested, assured him the most tedious hours she should pass would be those which would intervene till his return. Prudence and timidity hurried after the candid avowal of her heart ; but it could not be recalled, and the conscious blush which succeeded it did but heighten its effects. The baron, silent, but not insensible, bowed his gratitude on her hand, too delicate in such a moment even to raise that fair hand to his lips, and left the tent. When he was gone, Imogen, throwing herself on a seat, cast a look round the tent ; she did not think so confinedand comfortable an apartment could wear so desolate an air as the absence of its master shed over it; while oven the chair he had occupied, the book

ST. DOMINICK.

297

he had turned down open on the table, assumed an interest from that circumstance ; yet her wish of indulging unrestrained the (low of feeling and thought that agitated her mind, lessened her regret for her temporary absence. The visible change in his manners and conversation, so different from that of the former day, was the first object of her cogitation ; the impassioned sentiments of fervid and impetuous affection no longer burst in all the eloquence of love from his lips, but gave way to that playful easy strain of gallantry which even indifference can assume, but which the serious energy of passion disdains to use ; while on the subject of his union with mademoisselle

de V------he was still mysteriously silent*

His conversation, elegant and lively, appeared solely animated by the wish to entertain, apparently unconscious that it instructed and enlightened while it interested and amused ; it was the effusion of a rich and intelligent mind, a refined and cultivated taste ; but Imogen thought of n 2

298

TUE NOVICE OF

impulsive dictates of an enamoured heart, which glowed in his recital the preceding day, and sighed—Alas/’ said she, “ how great is the inconsistency of the human “ heart, when agitated by the conflicts of “ reason and passion; oh ! why should I « regret what I should so highly approve? u why deplore what I should so devoutly “desire? This interesting, this noble “ and virtuous being is the destined hus-“ band of another, every way deserving “ of his tenderness and esteem : his gra-“ titude to her, his duty to himself, his iC father, and his king, demand the sa~ “ crifice :—the sacrifice ! O Montargis, “ will it indeed be a sacrifice !—Foolish <{ heart! how eagerly dost thou believe “ what it would be misery supreme to doubt; yet, though this insuperable “ bar did not exist, the object of thy “ secret homage could never be thine. “ May’st thou with all thy keen and glow-<c ing feelings moulder in thy kindred dust, “ ere thy fond dotage impels Imogen de

ST. DOMINICK.

299

“ St. Dorval to plant a dagger where the “ wounds inflicted by the fatal love of “ Julia de Ribemont still rankles. Oh no ! “ break with thy sufferings, but let thy “ last pulsation be the triumphant throb “ of virtue victorious over passion !”

Such was the train of reflection which agitated the tender bosom of the youthful prisoner ; when the page who had hitherto attended spread an elegant collation ; and, like the subtle dwarfs which fairy love places near the beautiful persons of the enchanted damsels whom some magician holds in u sad endurancehe hovered round her with wakeful attention, seemed to anticipate her wishes, andw'aitedon her with the grace of a Ganymede. His intelligent countenance and lively looks induced Imogen frequently to address him, and his respectful manners, with a certain air of arch pertinence, repaid her for the condescension in this instance, as in every other since she had been the prisoner of Mon-targis. Imogen recognized the most re-

THE NOVICE OF

fined delicacy, a delicacy which never slumbered. She would have shrunk from the gaze of hacknied domestics, who, in the unhappy singularity of her situation, and the too-pointed attention of the baron, might have found ample food for impertinent surmise and vulgar curiosity ; but from the careless simplicity of the youthful page, who seemed not to have attained his fourteenth year, she had nothing to apprehend. She had observed, that,whenever the baron withdrew or entered the tent, lie always closely drew the curtain after him ; and that the page never left the outward apartment, which served as a kind of antichamber. The page, as usual, retired to his station when her solitary dinner was removed; and, to banish the constant and dangerous subjects of her thoughts from her heart and imagination, she took up the volume of Italian novels he had been reading; and, from her perfect knowledge of the French and Latin languages, found no great difficulty in coming to the literal

ST. D0M1KICK.

SOI

sense of the author. But the spirit, the interest, the pathos, which the florid and elegant translation of the baron shed over the story, no longer captivated her willing attention. She wondered she had even been amused, and recollected the poet who wrote execrable verses, but read them in so graceful a manner, and so melodious a voice, that what in perusal was contemptible, in recitation was enchanting ; and one seducing idea of the fascinating reader of Bandello soon lured her attention from the author. Resigning herself to the sweet strain of thought which love unailayedby every other sentiment awakened, she threw aside the book, and, clasping her hands, flung them over the back of the chair on which she sat, and gently pressed them with a cheek rosed with the blush of health and passion, and dimpled with one of those tender frolic smiles which ever caught its spirit from some felicitous sensation.

The bodkin which fastened up her hair had given way, and her uncon fined tresses

302

THE NOTICE OF

fell in rich disorder over her neck and shoulders. Thus lost in sweet abstraction she had remained for a considerable time, when the broad mass of light which flushsd through the scarlet curtains of the tent suddenly became obscure; and Imogen, raising her eyes to discern the cause, beheld it slowly withdrawn, and several heads appeared, each towering* over the other, and all animated by an expression of surprise, curiosity, triumph, and admiration.

Imogen involuntarily uttered an exclamation of surprise,and arose in great confusion , the curtain instantly closed, and the groupe retired. Almost in the same instant the page entered; his face flushed, his consternation evident. Falling at Imogen’s feet, he exclaimed:

" Lady, I am lost if you tell my lord.” Imogen obliging him to rise, lie continued, tc Certainly I was to blame to leave the “ anti-chamber; but who could havefore-“ seen? Yet I promised my lord not to “ leave the tent, no, not for a moment:.

ST. DOMINICK.

303

c‘ no gentleman would then have dared to “ intrude, because they knew I Mould tell “ the baron. But Antonine, the little ‘c drummer, so famous at quoits* was 6C playing not fifty paces from the tent, ci and I left it for a moment. The gen-“ tlemen, who saw me I suppose, took “ that opportunity.”

Imogen, who now understood the cause of his terror, assured him she would conceal the circumstance from his lord, and asked who the intruders were?

The page’s countenance brightening, he exclaimed : “ Pardie, lady, they were no <e common intruders either. There was “ first monseigneur the marquis de Sancy, (C colonel of the Swiss guards, and my “ lord high constable de Montmorenc}r, cC and the young count de Chateauneuf, << and some others. To confess the truth, <c lady, they have been all hovering about “ the tent since it was known that my 6i lord’s prisoner was a beautiful young lady of high quality, especially the mar-

304	THE	NOVICE OF

“ quis de Sancy, who is a rare pleasant <{ gentleman as any in the camp. To-day “ he met my lord the baron coming out of “ the tent, and I heard him say it was not “ agreeable to the laws of war he should <c monopolize the richest spoil to himself, cc and prayed to be introduced to you. “ My lord looked grave, and said him nay. ‘ Then take care/ said the mar-“ quis ; ‘ when the gallant king returns (l from Folambray, he will shew himself as “ little of the Scipio as yourself, baron.’ “ Yes, that was the word; on which my “ lord looked graver still, and said he was “ only waiting for an audience from the c{ king to have you restored to your friends, ii who were of illustrious rank. Then he “ drew the marquis away by the arm, and “ I heard no more. Hut I am sure the “ marquis must have bribed the sentinel to gain admittance ; and if my lord “ knew it he would doubtless send him a “ cartel.”

Imogen, extremely mortified and shock-

ST. DOMINICK.

305

ed and who now saw her situation in a new and humiliating light, assured the page she would not betray him, and he retired satisfied and grateful : while the hint he had insinuated of the cartel determined her not to reveal the incident, which, however insulting to her, might endanger a life a thousand times more precious in her eyes than her own. At that moment the baron entered. Her recent agitation still flushed her compaction toits deepest tint, her beautiful hair still hung in negligent disorder, and the delightful emotions she had a moment before indulged in had not yet withdrawn their sweet and tender expression from her countenance. Coquetry would have triumphed in the wild and bewitching disorder which invested the air, the person, and manner, of the fascinating prisoner when the baron appeared.

“ And whence this fresh blaze of beau-Ce ty, my charming captive ?” said he, gazing earnestly at her. Have you been

306

THE NOVICE OF

ft on another embassy to Proserpine more “ propitious than the former ?”

u No/’ said Imogen gaily, I have only “ made an expedition to the.regions of “ Faney, and have not yet recovered from “ the influence of her inspirations.”

“ And if Fancy could boast of her own “ apotheosis, she would doubtless fix on ic thee as her high priestess, who equally il teels and inspires her brightest visions. “ How rich would her altars then be in “ offerings! and how many who came to worship the deity would turn apostate, “ and adore the priestess!”

“ And you, my lord, I should suppose, u were already invested with the sacerdo-c< tal stole, and presided among the high 6‘ priests of gallantry over that court es-“ tablished in this province by your own << Provençal troubadours. ”*

* The high court of love was established in Picardy, the constant rival of Provence, by the troubadours. It had its plaids et jeux sous l’ormel, consist-

ST. DOMINICK.

307

C( No/’ said the baron smiling, ff I can-“ not boast of such an honour ; but were <c faith and devotion sufficient to obtain “ it, I should rank high in the album sane-Ci torum of love; for I am an enthusiastic “ devotee, capable of attaining to the most daring heights of amorous fanaticism, fS worshiping the deity in spirit and in u truth, and, like the members of the Greek *' church, doing homage to the picture of ^ my tutelar saint, not by prostration, but C( by a kiss.” The baron drew a miniature from his bosom, and, having devoutly pressed it to his lips, presented to the eye of Imogen the lively resemblance of the Novice of St. Doininich ! (i Yes,” said he.

ing of knights and ladies of high rank, exercised and approved in courtesy, who assumed a judicial power in matters of the most delicate nature ; nor did their decrees receive effect from the voluntary submission of the constituent members only : the general courtesy of the times stamped them with unquestionable authority, and the legislation itself did not refuse to sanction them with its approbation.

308

THE NOVICE OF

fondly gazing on it, " a saint from whose “ lips I first received the purest essence of “ true religion, and whose sublime senti-ic ments even at her feet I vowed should f( be my orthodoxy.’*

A rapturous recollection flashed like lightning over the memory of Imogen, and she beheld herself in the gallery of Mont-morell, the suppliant minstrel at her feet : for a moment she gazed in extreme emotion on the picture, while, as the baron again pressed it to his lips, a sweet delight thrilled through her heart; but the sweet effusion was but transient—it faded before the chill suggestion of prudence, that the picture of the lady de St. Dorval should not remain in the possession of the baron de Montargis, the husband of the lady de

V------; and she coldly said, tf To have

secretly drawn my picture, and to have bestowed it on another, was an unjusti* “ fiable action in Theodore : in you, my “ lord, it will be but an act consonant to cr your usual delicacy to restore it to the <c original.’'

ST. DOMINICK.

309

“ Or else/' said the baron sportively, “ I suppose you will cite me to appear in “ the high court of love, and oblige me “ to be tried by the degrees of thepreaux “ chevaliers zndpriuse dames of which it is tc composed.”

(t Your gaiety, my lord/' said Imogen, deeply wounded by what appeared to her agitated feelings the very levity of indifference, “ is very enviable ” and, in spite of every effort to restrain them, the tears rushed to her eyes.

The baron started, the hilarity of his countenance fled, and, with a look of the strongest emotion, he pursued the pearly drops that stole down the cheek of Imogen, repeating in a tone of perturbation, “My gaiety! God of heaven! Enviable! “ Am I then so finished, so very finished “ an actor? has the necessity, the dread-“ ful necessity, of self-subjection so stampt u the traces of dissimulation on me, that I il can appear nothing but the thing I am '5 not? O God! why must I conceal a

THE NOVICE OF

“ feeling* from her, by whom alone every “ feeling is governed? Why can 1 notun-ci fold my whole soul, O Imogen! to thy il investigation ? Alas, no ! Coward like, I strive to conceal its weakness, its secret “ workings, its conflicting passions, even from my own observation. I strive to <c dream myself into delusion, and shun “ the truth with horror. 1 would fancy I am all I appear to be, and cheat my heart «5 into the belief it bled not in anguish « beneath the veil of this all-enviable “ gaiety. Enviable! merciful heaven! “ The wretch who, condemned to die a “ death of agony, yet clings in life’s sur-« viving hopes with a heart stretched “ upon the wheel of insupportable sus-" pense, revels in bliss compared to what / “ have suffered since thy presence has c‘ again revived those emotions, those sen-Cf timents, which fate vainly opposes, and cc which I hourly feel are interweaving u their influence with my very existence. “ It is in vain I would have taught myself

ST. DOMINICK.

311

“ to forget thee; it was in vain 1 said she “ can never be mine; yet still thy idea, like “ the glowing- mildness of an evening sun, “ stole over the horizon of memory, and " shed its vital beam on a heart which “ again from the sphere of love receives “ its every emotion.—O Imogen! witli-“ draw not this precious hand from me. “ It is not yet criminal to imprint on it “ the effusions of a soul, which from the “ moment I first beheld thee was all thy €t own : it is not yet criminal to gaze on ff that countenance, whose sweet intelli-te gence betrays the union of our minds, “ the sympathy of our mutual feelings : it “ is not yet a crime to dare to love thee. *' A crime! O God! to love thee as thou “ art worthy to be loved, is to love virtue iS in its purest essence and fairest form!’* Imogen, overwhelmed, dissolved, amazed, struggling between the conflicts of duty, reason, pride, and love, released her band, and faintly said : “ My lord, you “ forget that it is the baron de Mont^rgis

THE NOVICE OF

“ who adcTresses the daughter of the count “ de St. Dorval; that it is the betrothed

“ husband of the lady de V------ who—”

“ Forget!” interrupted the baron, “ for-“ get! Oh, would I could indeed forget! fC would I could indeed resign myself to ff the sweet illusion that I was still the “ minstrel of Provence, and thou the novice “ of St. Dominick ! O Imogen ! were <f such indeed our rank and lot in life, the heart, the imagination, luxuriate in “the unambitious felicity which might have “ then been ours ; then the baleful breath “ of hereditary discord had not blasted our “ opening joys ; the chilling influence of <c interest had not frozen our blushing fi loves even in their spring of beauty; the *f daring views of self-wrapt ambition had “ not trampled on the best affections of “ the heart, nor the stern voice of duty “ forbid that union which love had formed and virtue consecrated; all that this “ world can give of bliss had been ours, “ and the tender heart would have been

ST. DOMINICK.

313

° spared the lingering torture of throb-ff bing in sad despondency through count-less ages of despair and sorrow!”

The baron had again taken the hand of Imogen, and as he concluded a burning tear dropt upon its snowy surface ; that tear was indeed the eloquence of a heart whose feeling mocked the power of expression. Imogen impulsively pressed the hand which grasped hers, then turned aside her head and wept, faintly exclaiming :Leave “ me ! oh in mercy leave me !” The baron, seizing both her hands, imprinted them with an ardent kiss—Imogen, one “ word, and I obey thee. Whence flow “ these tears? spring they from a kindred “ source with those that filled my eyes ?

Imogen!—forgive!—but—dost thou in-CJ deed deplore the severity of that fate :t which drives me to despair? Weepest li thou in pity or in love? O Imogen!” gently insinuating his arms around her, and straining lier to his breast, “ do our hearts now beat against each other in all

VOL. II.

O

314

THE NOVICE OF

“ the kindred sympathy of passion, or do “ I feel the throb of thine less ardent than “ my o\vn ? Oh no V that «lance was my “ assurance.”

“ Leave me, I supplicate/’ she faintly exclaimed, withdrawing herself from the baron’s glowing fold.

“ In a moment such as this, Imogen, “ leave thee ! Oh, not for worlds !”

Modesty and pride took the alarm. “ My lord, I command you to leave me!” said the daughter of St. Dorval, in a voice full of dignity, and flinging the baron from her; who, catching her robe as she retreated, exclaimed: “ Imogen, what is it you ec fear? Beaming in innocence, supreme in thy own strength, the radiant ægis of virtue shields thee equally from attaint “ and danger.”

“ But not from insult/’ returned Imogen indignantly, and retired to the inner division of the apartment, closely drawing the curtain which skreened it.

The profound sighs of the baron only

ST. DOMINICK.

315

pierced this slight barrier, which virtue honoured by virtue rendered inviolable. Not even by a word did he profane the silence offended delicacy imposed ; and after having* remained for a few minutes in the attitude Imogen had left him,, his arms still outstretched to detain her, he rushed from the tent. When Imogen was assured of his departure, she flung herself on her couch, and, giving full scope to the tide of emotion that swelled her heart, wept tears of real anguish. For the first time she considered the passion the baron professed for her as equally derogatory to her principles, her delicacy, and her pride.

ff He has at last,” said she, “ dropt the “ veil. He confesses his tenderness, if it u merits the title, had no object in view “ save the gratification of temporary pro-“ pensity. From the first he knew I could “ never be his. Another had his vows, his “respect, his gratitude; while I, all-be-“ lieving and all-deceived, was still eon-“ sidered as the object of idle dalliance.

THE NOVICE OF

“ receiving’ with fond credulity avowals of <<r unsanctioned love, my pride, my duty, “ my reason, should have rejected. But who would have been deceived as I “ was, and doated on deception ?” All the baron’s perfections, his insinuating graces, his noble mind, his genius and virtues, rushed on her dissolving heart, and passion held a momentary triumph, but it was but momentary. cc No,’* said Imogen, “ 1 never can be his; he said it : but “ yet he knows me not ; he knows not the “ powers of that mind, of which he has “ made the heart’s weakness the criterion. “ I will not languish through countless (S ages of despair and sorrow. And yet, I f< could have loved him ! could ! O God !— “ but it is over! I can also cease to love j| when virtue commands it. My passions are human, but I have no common mind, “ 1 feel 1 have not ; 1 always felt it, even ft in the convent of St. Dominick, though “ all-dependent on the bounty of its fC members. My heart shall submit to my

ST. DOMINICK.

31?

u reason, though it burst in the struggle. “ My mother! my sainted mother! I will emulate thy virtues, and thy errors shall “ be my beacon ; for thine also, like thy <c child’s, were the errors of love. And thou, “ my father, who lookest up to me for that beam of bliss that is to gild the evening “ of thy stormy life, thou shalt not look u in vain.” At the recollection of her father Imogen’s tears flowed afresh, and his probable sufferings on her account rushed to her mind; while a keen self-reproach that so little of her thoughts had lately been devoted to him wrung her heart, and added to the conflicts of her mind.

318

THE NOVICE OF

CHAP- XV2II»

Most sacred fyre, that burnest mightily In living breasts, ykindled first above Among the eternal spheres and lamping sky,

Among thence poured into men, which men call love. Not that same which doth base affection move In brutish minds,

liut that sweet fit that doth true beauty love,

And chuseth virtue for its dearest dame,

Whence springs all noble deeds and never-dying fame : Well did antiquity a god thee doom.

Spenser.—Fairy Queen.

To urge bold virtue's uni emitted nerve,

And wake the strong divinity of sonl.

Akenside.

IMOGEN had passed the night in restless agitation ; her transient repose was broken by starts of causeless horror, or by dreams of frightful import ; and when towards the morning dawn exhausted nature had plunged her into a deep and heavy

ST. DOMINICK.

319

sleep, she was suddenly awakened by a repeated discharge of fire-arms that shook the couch on which she reposed. À new sense of danger assailed her heart. She had not taken off her clothes the preceding night: she now rushed from her couch to the outward apartment ; it was empty, as was the anti-chamber.

The firing continued, and noise and tumult roared on every side. Imogen, breathless and panting, endeavoured to collect her scattered thoughts, Danger and the baron de Montargis alone presented themselves to her mind. At that moment the page entered, followed by an officer. He advanced to Imogen, and said : f*' The <e baron de Montargis, madam, commends ff him to you.”

et He is safe, I hope?” breathlessly interrupted Imogen.

f‘ I hope so, madam,” returned the stranger; “but his is a post of danger. The “ besieged have made a sortie and a furious tc attack on one of the outposts, which

32 0

THE NOVICE OF

“ the baron bad been ordered to succour. “ As he mounted his horse he wrote a few <e lines on this slip of paper; then folding it round this trinket, which he said bc-longed to his illustrious prisoner, bade me to deliver it into her own hands, then “ rushed to the scene of action.”

The officer presented the little packet to the trembling Imogen, and with a respectful bow retired. Imogen flung herself on a chair : for a moment deprived of all motion, she could not open the packet; at last her trembling hands unfolded it; something fell; she supposed it to be her own picture, and let it lie on the ground, while she read the following billet:

Fear not for thyself ; the guardian spirit of innocence and virtue hovers round thee; the God of goodness is thy shield. I am rushing to battle, perhaps to death. If this hour is my last, it will be at least the most glorious of my life. Then commend thee to the king in person ; he will restore thee to thy father : and give the in-

ST. DOMINICK.

321

closed a place in thy bosom, for in life or death its original was all thy own.

“ De Montargis.

I cannot part with thy beloved resemblance until the heart which now beats against it shall cease to throb. Again thine, for ever thine.”

Imogen, almost lifeless, fell back on her chair. She seemed for the first time to feel she loved. Hope for a moment revived her failing senses.

“ He is in no danger,” said she; <f the world he was born to serve, to adorn, " to instruct, has yet great and unsatis-“ fied claims on him; and Providence “ will spare him as its best representative “ on earth !” She then took up the trinket ; it was a small gold case, which opened by a spring, and Imogen beheld a beautiful and striking resemblance of the baron de Montargis in his minstrel habit. She pressed it to her lips and to her heart j o 2

322

THE NOVICE OF

and, while the firing’ continued with fresh force and awakened new fears, she dropt on her knees, her heart offered up prayers of supplication for the safety of its object, while every shot that reached her ear seemed to wound that tender anxious heart in its most vital nerve. The firing at last ceased. She flew to the outward apartment, and dispatched the page to learn if all was over, if his lord was safe ; but before the boy returned, the firing was again renewed, and Imogen again trembled, prayed, and wept. The boy at last returned.

“ It is all over/’ exclaimed he joyfully ; cc my lord has beat the poltroons back, “ and—”	“	Is	he	safe	?"	was	all	the

trembling Imogen could utter. The page, losing the hilarity that animated his countenance, returned, “ My lord is, I fear, <4 sadly wounded. Just now, as he led a “ prisoner of great consequence to the C{ king’s tent, I perceived he walked with <c difficulty ; he looked pale, and his scarf “ was bathed in blood.”

ST. DOMINICK.

323

Imogen clang to a chair for support; her heart died within her bosom ; she attempted to speak, but her lips moved in silence. The boy, looking on her compassionately, said, tf But 1 may be mis-u taken, lady ; I will run and bring you a “ better account.” He flew out of the tent, and Imogen sank on the chair in a state of dreadful suspense, vibrating between hope and terror, alternately the prey of either; her eye tearless, lier cheek pale, her hands clasped. Near half an hour had elapsed when a footstep was heard on the outside apartment; the curtain was drawn, and the baron himself appeared.

His looks were haggard and ghastly, his complexion colourless, his arm bound in a scarf stained with blood. Imogen, with a mild exclamation of joy and horror, sprung forward to meet him, and fell senseless at his feet.

The energy of her spirits, the strength of her feelings, vanquished the weakness of a frame greatly debilitated by the re-

THE NOVICE OF

32 i

peated agitations of her mind. She almost instantly recovered, andfound herself supported in the baron’s arms. With a look of tender enquiry she raised her eyes to his, but suddenly let them fall, abashed by the expression of his triumphant glance. The baron did not, could not, speak; his heart was too full to give expression to its feelings, though his whole soul swam in his eyes, and fluttered on his lips. He pressed the hand he held to his forehead and his heart; transport breathed in his short-N heaved sighs, and delight and gratitude shone in his smiles. At that moment two surgeons, followed by some of the baron’s attendants, entered the tent. Imogen’s fears again took the alarm, as, with professional pomposity, these gentlemen spread out as many bandages, instruments, &c. &c. as might serve a military hospital after a general engagement. Her cheek again grew pale, and she perceived not she was an object of more attention and observation to the bystanders than the baron him-

ST. DOMINICK.

325

self. The baron, with a look full of eloquence, and in a low voice, entreated her to retire; but as the wound, though it had bled copiously, was but slight and a little above the wrist, so that it was only requisite to tuck up the sleeve of his habit to dress it, Imogen’s courage returned, animated by joy, and she smilingly said : u Are you then, my lord, so little versed u in the rules of chivalry P Was there ever “ yet a brave and gallant knight who,when “ wounded, did not prefer trusting for his <f cure to the skill of some fair damsel ra-e: ther than to Æsculapius himself?”

The baron only answered her gaity with a smile full of expression ; and she continued to hover round him with endearing attention, tearing the bandages and assisting the surgeons to bind up the wound, and saying repeatedly to herself, C( Surely this I would do for a stranger.” Meantime the baron continued silent, but his speaking glance pursued lier every motion. Imogen observed the paleness of

326

THE NOVICE OF

his cheek, and she presented him a glass of cordial. lie gently put it back, and said in a low voice, " Thou hast already “ presented me an elixir, the elixir of life

itself/'

Imogen, colouring and smiling, poured out a second glass, touched it with her lips, and, presenting him another, said, tc Do you then refuse to pledge me r”

The baron put aside the cup she offered with the air and look of a Hebe, and snatching I he glass her lips had enriched, quaffed it off, and bowed on the hand to which lie returned it.

The surgeons and attendants, with a look of important significance, retired. Their looks had not escaped the sensitive delicacy of Imogen ; and when she again found herself alone with the baron, covered with confusion, she retired to a distant part of the tent; while the incident of the preceding e\ening, and the sentiments and determinations it gave rise to, rushed across her mind, and stood opposed to the tender emotion of the present moment.

ST. DOMINICK.

327

Artless and unsophisticated, equally the child of nature and of reason, she had not the power to conceal those feelings she had strength of mind to determine on subjugating. After a long and impressive silence, during which the baron's countenance betrayed the strongest agitation, he arose, and, seating himself by Imogen, in a voice full of emotion, said :

“ Imogen, the struggle is over, the vic-" tory is thine ! Thy virtue, thy tender-<c ness, have effected what even thy beauty te and thy genius could not accomplish. "The prejudices of sect, the rancour of “ hereditary hatred, the influence of ty-“ rannic duty, the fastidiousness of a false " sense of honour, and the splendid lures " of interest and ambition, all, all lie van-“ quished, and love, virtue, and Imogen, are alone triumphant ! Nay, sweet ff maid, hear me out in patience, then re-" solve, decide for me: be thou my des-et tiny, for in thy hands I place the future *f fate of my existence.

328

THE NOVICE OF

ff Imogen, I left thee in a state of mind last night which it were vain to agitate thine by describing. It was a dreadful ct conflict ; even now I shudder at thecon-(i test my reason and my heart, my duty tc and my love, sustained. O Imogen!

give me thy pity, while I confess that I ff believed both reason and duty com-“ manded me for ever to resign thee, for many a solemn tie had bound me to another; and thou wert—the daughter of St. Dorval ! Yes, it was in the overflow' of filial tenderness and filial duty, when my mind was weakened by suffering, ff and my frame debilitated by sickness ;

when I sank in my father’s arms, op~ cf pressed by his tenderness as he wept “ tears of joy over his recovering son ; “ while the lovely preserver of my liberty and life stood beside us, shared in our st transports, and mingled her tears with ours : it was then I suffered my father to place my hand in hers, and—O Imogen ! spare me the rest; duty and

ST. DOMINICK.

329

fr gratitude triumphed, and thou wert— resigned !

“ The day of my marriage with made-

“ moiselle de V----(who had merit and

“ charms to awaken a passion which I “ could never feel) was fixed. I had de-“ termined never more to behold thee ;

but from my father (who had so early <f made himself the master of the'secret l< of what he termed my romantic passion) I had received a promise that, previous to " that momentous day, he would rescue “ thee from the cruel destiny which await-“ ed thee, and provide for thee a comfort-able independence.

I had every reliance on the humanity of my father’s heart, the rectitude of (i his mind, and I guaranteed his promise by a solemn vow that I would never

<( give my hand to mademoiselle de Y---

ff till it was performed.

“ Both events were delayed by the per-“ turbation of public affairs. My father “ and myself were obliged to follow the

330

THE NOVICE OF

“ kin" to the sieges of Aix-la-Chapelle

“ and Laon, and mademoisselle de V-------

“ remained with her aunt at Paris. Then, Imogen, an accident the most extraor-“ dinory gave thee back to me in a situa-<f tion the most interesting, the most “ heroic. The common-place qualifica-

st tions of mademoiselle de V-----shrunk

u before the more than moral virtues of “ my lovely heroine. Beaming in beauty, <( eminent in genius, supreme in virtue, <f at one moment 1 beheld thee opposing thyself to death in its most dreadful t( aspect, to save a new-found father’s life ; u the next, all soul-dissolving softness, all “ bewitching insinuation, delicate though “playful, reserved though tender, thy “ mind endued with more than manly cou-rage, thy heart with more than woman’s “ softness! Now, from thy lip of love, I “ caught the precept of wisdom and of “ knowledge ; and now in a voice of “ spheral melody received the purest do-“ cuments of sentiment and taste, while

ST. DOMINICK.

331

“ the unbidden blushes of thy modest “ cheek, the feeling throb of thy unso-“ phisticaled heart, contributed, with thy “ mind’s intelligence and thy person’s “ charms, to renovate a passion which " time, absence, reason, and duty, might “ have faded into a dear and tender re-“ collection of its once adored object, “ but which, at sight of thee, in all thy “ blaze of excellence, again seized on my “ heart with more than all its former power, “ circulates through every vital artery, and " forms my very soul. Yet, Imogen, I “ checked the tide of passion, stifled “ every sigh, and struggled with my ff w ishes ; and hadst thou still been cold, “ I bad baply still been silent.

But, O my sweet friend! last night “ that heart, whose soft pulsation answer-<f ed to the throb of mine, that glance whose glowing beam shot hope and joy

“ over every kindling sense--------God of

“ heaven ! sure it was an effort more than “ mortal, that in that ecstatic moment tore

THE NOVICE OF

“ me from thee, or rather say it was thy te better reason triumphed over mine. The “ night which succeeded to that moment “of transient felicity was dreadful; my mind was torn by insupportable con-“ flicts; the long and unrequited tender-“ ness of an amiable woman, my honour “ so solemnly engaged, my duty to my “ father, to my king, opposed to love, to “ happiness, and Imogen. O Imogen ! rc thou whose every passion is the willing “ subject of thy reason, thou canst form “ no idea of that raging fever of the “ mind when struggling between the “ conflicts of passion and of reason.— “ Overcome by the contest, yet still un-“ decided to which to assign the victory, “ in this moment of awful hesitation, I “ was called on for corporeal exertion, “ when the mind was weakened and de-“ bilitated, for animal courage when moral “ vigour was subdued; yet the wild irrita-“ tion of my feelings nerved my arm. I “ flew to the hottest spot in the scene of

ST. DOMINICK.

333

Ctf action,, but not until I had interested “ the king in thy favour, not until I sent ^ thee some faint remembrance of a love <c which, even in the moment when death “ hovered over me, filled my heart with u thee alone.

“ Yes, Imogen, even in the battle’s “ fiercest fury thy image still pursued me, “ awakened a thousand tender fears for thy “ safety, suspended my up-lifted arm, and “ left my fame in danger ; it was in a mo-“ ment such as this I received this wound, “ oh ! it was love himself inflicted it— tf Precious wound ! it is to you I owe that “ undisguised, that unreserved avowal Ci of tenderness which nature, under the in-t( fluence of terror, betrayed in thy fears for “ my safety ; thy tenderness, thy anxiety, “ thy active solicitude, bind me thine for <c ever. Nay, my sweet friend, hear me ci out, bear with me yet a little longer. To “ break that inviolable contract my heart “ first made with thine would now alone be dishonour ; all the persuasion I was

334

THE NOVICE OF

u master of I used to win thy love, nor “ hast thou denied I was successful : thy “ happiness is now involved in mine; my “ own I could sacrifice, thine I dare not, not even to gratify a father’s ambition. “ No, there is no law, natural or moral, “ which obliges a child to offer himself, “ and what is dearer than himself, a vo-luntary victim on the altar of parental Ct authority. 1 possess a free moral agency. “ I am capable of judging' of what can ‘‘ constitute my own happiness or misery, “ and when virtue sanctions my views of “ the former, heaven itself would frown “ on its cowardly resignation, and virtue “ equally forbids me to abandon thee, or 6fi repay the tenderness and virtues of thy “ rival with hypocrisy and deceit; oh ! say, (C shall I unite her destiny to that of a man who can only render her miserable “ as himself, or shall I requite the candid “avowel of her love by feigning with coun-<c terfeit affection to return her tenderness? 6< or openly strike at her heart by that un-

ST. DOMINICK.

335

6( disguised coldness and disgust which “ would be the result of a union so repug-“ nant to mine? No, I am not so ac-“ complished a villain; not yet so deeply ‘‘ plunged in simulation ; I am even still 'f more to be pitied than condemned, i( more unfortunate than guilty. You “ only, O Imogen ! have I wronged, when (e I resigned thee whom heaven had as-u sorted as my better self; yes, I will fly

“ to mademoiselle de V----, at her feet

“ I will unfold every secret of my heart; 4* she is proud, she is generous, she will reject a hand, a person, unaccompa-tc nied by the heart ; her passions though “ strong are pliant ; I know her sensa-t: tions seldom preserve a medium ; her “ character is composed of extremes, and “ the sentiments which will succeed to “ those she has already experienced, will “ take their energy from the overflowing “ of those which preceded them, and her (i indifference will soon become as marked <c as her former partiality. Some new ob-

THE KOVICE OF

“ject will awaken another romantic pas-“ sion, and I shall be forgotten.

“ Nay, a moment’s patience, and I have “ done. I know thou wilt urge (that first “ great obstacle vanquished) our families’ “ rooted hatred, the difference of our re-ligion ; but the omnipotence of love and “ reason shall subdue their united force. “ ïs not the essence of our faith the same ? “ Are not thy sublime sentiments my or-“ thodoxy ? And for those idle ceremo-“ nies, framed to fascinate the vulgar soul, “ and win the faith through the medium of “ the senses, these thou wilt recant to satisfy “ the world’s scruples : and for our fa-‘‘ thers, are we not their children, their “ only children ? And though their hearts “ in the first flush of anger cast us from “ them, yet, O Imogen ! the parent’s heart “ is Nature’s throne : she will exert her “ sweet prerogative, and give us back our “ tender claims. Then thou, more fa~ “ voured than the herald dove of heaven’s “ peace, shall not only bear the olive-

ST. DOMINICK.

337

‘‘ branch into our families., but also find “ a resting-place for thine own bosom. “ Meantime, until this blessed moment “ arrives, let us seize this golden oppor-ft tunity. Another day "makes Laon the “ king’s, and disbands his officers from im-“ mediate duty. On the skirts of the tC forest of Ardennes I possess a sweet re-‘‘ treat, mine by my mother’s right. Thi-‘6 tber, O Imogen ! let us fly from a world “ I know thou despisest and I no longer “ prize. Let us renounce its cares, its “ errors, its prejudices, and its conteu-“ tions : imparadised in sweet seclusion, “ all possessing and all possessed, let us “ snatch the wreath of bliss, which fate “ suspends over our heads, ere time withers “ its freshness : Jet us quaff the cup of “ rapture ere experience poisons its sweets. u Loving and beloved, delighting and de-“ lighted, we will chasten the ardor of “ passion with the delicacy of sentiment, “ and strengthen its powers by the reci-“ procal communion of the mind’s intelli-vol. 2.	v

THE NOVICE OF

<c gence. Mutually exerting ourselves in “ the cause of virtue,, the happiness we ct bestow on others shall be reflected back “ on ourselves. Our souls, burning with tC equal ardor to attain to the summit of u human excellence, and to diffuse it, “ shall mingle and combine their forces, u and act with incessant energy in the 61 cause of reason and benevolence. Super riorto those fatal prejudices from which “ the sufferings of mankind emerge, the “ spirit of truth shall fill our minds, and “ our precepts and examples shall dissemi-“ nate its salutary elfects. Thus rich in “ virtue and in love, our state will be that “ of the beatified, and that heaven shall “ be ours of which faith and fancy do “ but dream.”

The baron ceased, apparently overcome by that picture of virtuous felicity he had sketched in such warm tints; while his eager and enraptured eye pursued the varying expression of Imogen’s countenance, which so finely pourtrayed the correspond-

ST. DOMINICK.

339

ing emotions of her heart. Now transport's throb heaved her bosom with the wildest palpitation, and the languor of passion swam in her melting eye : now the spirit of virtue sublimed their glance, and kindled all their fire. Now the blush of love faded on her cheek beneath the oppressive joys which seized her imagination : and now the energy of virtue diffused a deeper glow. Alternately the mistress or the heroine, all impassioned'or all sublimed, dissolved, elated, overwhelmed, she remained for a considerable time lost in the delirium of her heart and imagination.

The baron, who construed her silence, her abstraction, her great and visible emotion, into a tacit ratification of his heart’s fond wishes, fell at her feet, and, seizing both her hands, raised his eyes to heaven, and exclaimed : “ Thou art mine1, and here “ in the face of heaven I swear-----”

Imogen released her hand, placed it on his lips, and almost breathless faintly interrupted him.

THE NOVICE OF

<c Forbear, my lord!” she exclaimed, assisting him to rise ; “ you know not what you do. One moment forbear!

" and------”

“ Imogen, what meanest thou ?” he tremulously demanded.

“ Give me, iny lord, give me but one

“ moment, and then------”

She arose in great perturbation, walked up and down the tent with a varying pace ; her heart throbbed with violence, her colour successively changed from white to red ; by degrees her agitation subsided, an air of dignity gradually involved her whole form, the varying expression of her countenance assumed the character of self-confidence reposing on the united strength of reason and virtue ; her mind, with all its native and uncommon powers, was for the first time called on to reveal its force : she felt the solemnity of the appeal, and triumphed in her conscious ability to answer it. The sentiments, the determinations, of the preceding night rushed toiler

ST. DOMINICK.

341

memory, and strengthened the weakness of her heart. She approached the baron with a mild and steady countenance; then, seating herself opposite to him, she said with a gentle smile :

“ My lord, I have to thank you for this “ patient endurance of emotion, perhaps too weakly indulged, and not without “ difficulty repressed; for, though I have “ listened to you in silent attention, yet " it was with amazement, and sometimes “ perhaps with a stronger and more tender “ sentiment. Yes, I will confess that rriy “ heart entered but too deeply into those “ visionary schemes which yours so strong-“ ly, so dangerously, delineated ; and my “ mind became the willing captive of the <e sophistry of yours. To me, my lord, you “ have unfolded every sentiment of a heart ‘f for the possession of which, sanctioned “ by virtue, by duty, and by reason, I would barter the empire of the world, Cf and think the purchase cheap.*' Imogen for a moment paused, the colour

342

THE NOVICE OF

heightened in her cheek, she sighed, and continued :

u Whatever were my native endow-ments, the unalienable possessions of my “ nature, I was ignorant of their power Cf and extent until I first knew you, my “ lord. Till that period, perhaps the most ct momentous of my life, I knew not I had “ a heart so rich in sweet emotion, feel-“ ings capable of such profound sensibi-“ lity, so alive to woe, so awakened to bliss; for till then nor woe nor bliss had “ e’er assailed me; my life a long dead “ calm, joyless though serene, uninterest-“ ing though unruffled, stole on in listless apathy, undelighting and undesired. “ Each day promised but the literal echo “ of that which had expired : I beheld its tc birth with indifference* and only felt a 4 joy when its wearisome and oft told “ round had crept into oblivion. I pressed my nightly pillow with no fond reeol-“ lection to warm my dream ; or, if I “ dreamed of happiness, I wakened in

ST. DOMINICK.

343

“ amazement, and wondered if indeed it “ could exist, save in a dream. Then I “ rose without a hope to gild the coming iC liours, and wished for night to sleep and dream again. You came, my lord, in “ humble seeming came; but your mind fi scoffed at disguise, and you were still “ yourself. The attractive force of sym-k‘ pathy drew us to each other; the intel-4f ligence of thy mind called forth the bet-“ ter qualities of mine, and my soul in its “ progressive expansion did but emulate “ the grander elevation of yours. Im-“ mured from all kindred association, I 65 resembled a dower sown by sonic vagrant “ breeze in a soil uncongenial to its na-“ ture : drooping in the shade which chilled “ its growth and veiled its blushes, but “ permitted to receive the sun’s nurturing “ glow, it lifts its languid head, and bc-“ trays its blushing colours to the radiant “beam. You came, my lord, and said, “ Let there he light, and there was light. “ Then each day was pregnant with in-

THE NOVICE OF

“ terest, life assumed a new and lovelier aspect : I rose with the fond expectation of tastings joys more exquisite than those “ I had already experienced, and at night cc I pressed my pillow with the recollection cc of the day’s events throbbing at my “ delighted heart; sweet was the dream of my rest, but sweeter still the awaken* ing thought which chased it from my “ pillow. Your rank in life I then thought “ inferior even to my own, all humble as “ it was; but with me you stood superior " and alone ; or, if in the scale of human “ creation I assigned you a place, it only tf gave me a higher opinion of the species “ to which you belonged than in my mo-“ ments of warmest philanthropy I had i( dared to indulge in. Ilad I then pos-“ sessed the empire of the world, it had “ been thine. The empire of my heart “ was all I owned, and I bestowed it on “ thee. Then would I have flown with “ thee to the remotest corner of the earth, “ gladly have shared thy sorrows or thy

ST. DOMINICK.

345

“ joys, assuaged thy sufferings, or exalted ff thy pleasures.”

“ Imogen ! Imogen !” wildly interrupted the baron, unable to repress the extacy of his heart.

For, then, my lord,” continued Imogen firmly, without suffering him to proceed, “ society had no claims on me which “ (standing in the relation to each other “ I then believed we did) could have been “ injured. Desolate and alone, deserted ft by the world, and ignorant of its opi-ff nions or its laws, an alien from my birth, “you would have been my world ; in you “ all those ties so dear to the human heart “ would have been united ; and in joining ff my destiny to yours I should have vio-“ lated no duty, betrayed no trust, com-<f mitted no injury. But now, my lord, “ the sweet illusion is vanished. Hadst thou been still but the minstrel of Pro-fc vence, haply even still the daughter of ‘f St. Dorval had been thine ; but as the “ baron de Montargis—never !”

p 2

THE NOVICE OF

t€ Never ! God of heaven ! Never! O <e Imogen ! beware—thou—”

“ My lord, I entreat you will hear me “ out. Since we parted in the gallery of Montmorell, an extraordinary change has C( taken place in my situation I am no “ longer an alien, unconnected, deserted;

the important scene of life is open to et me : I have received the part allotted <f me to perform; and however frail, how-“ ever weak, the secret movements of my “ heart, my actions at least shall not sully “ the dignity of the character I am to “ sustain. I owe a duty to society which “ I will not betray. Yes, I will respect ec those social bonds which draw mankind “ together, nor, by resigning myself to the ct overwhelming influence of passion, af-<f ford the young, the thoughtless, and the €( imprudent, an example to justify their C( own improper conduct. The duty Iowe tf my father I will never sacrifice to the gratification of my own propensities ; “ I will not again rob him of a child so

ST. DOMINICK.

34?

r‘ lately found, so long; deplored ; I will not (i abandon his arms in the moment when es they open with tender longings to re-" ceive me; nor will 1, under the influ-“ cnce of an unhappy passion, visit back ec his early errors on his head, and make “ the crimes of tin* child the father's “ dreadful retribution : no when I forsake i( my father may God forsake me ! To iC you, O my lord Î what do I not owe to (i you ? A love that formed my heart's “ first best blessing; the sacrifice of your ambition. )our prejudices, O God ! even <f of your filial duty, y our probity, and your honour: for me you would violate them f‘ all. And shall I take a treacherous ad-c< vantage of your love ? shall I assist you “ to perpetuate those feuds which have so long disunited our families ? shall I tear fe you from your father’s heart, and plant another dagger in the wound my mo* tC ther’s fatal passion inflicted ? shall I se-“ ducc you to sully that honour so imma-“ culate to violate a promise so solemnly

THE NOVICE OF

made, and to break the heart of an ami-able and affectionate woman, to whom you owe every thing, and who looks “ forward to a union with the object of “ her first tenderness as the consumma-fC tion of her happiness, the reward of her “ long-tried constancy ? No, my lord, <f never ! And here I swear in the face “ of heaven—”

Imogen, Imogen, drive me not mad !” wildly exclaimed the baron, snatching her clasped and uplifted hands ; make me “ not hate thy dazzling virtues. Thinkest thou, wondrous but insensible woman ! “ that I am more or less than man, that thus you dare to tamper with my heart, my reason, and my passions? Is it thus €\ thou wouldst tear thy image from my soul by fastening round it, even in all “ thy amiable severity, with more than all thy former power? Oh ! if indeed thou wouldst teach me to sacrifice every hope “ of happiness to prudence, (for reason “ exacts no such self-immolation,) invoke

ST. DOMINICK.

349

ff me not with those melting eyes; preach “ not to me the rigid laws of fastidious tf virtue with the look, the eloquence, of “ angels ; nor, whilst thou wouldst have “ me worship thee as a saint, make me “ adore thee as a woman ! Recal, in “ mercy to me and (suffer me to say) to tf thyself, recal that half-breathed vow “ which the fanaticism, not the moderate spirit, of virtue elicited. Or if thou wilt <f not retract what thou hast already ut-tered, let that vow to heaven be—that thou art mine for ever !”

That, my lord, I cannot be, even on <( your terms, since they included a recan-tation of religion ; for, though thou et knowest in the very region of supersti-<f tion I laughed at her fopperies and her errors, even with her professional vota-<c ries, yet, since my public apostacy would K< wound my father’s heart (deep-wedded “ to the religion of his ancestors) in its ei most vital nerve, I will not make it ; for tf I am more certain it is an act of true

350

THE NOVICE OF

“ religion to avoid wounding a tender pa-rent’s heart, than I am of any specula-<f tive point of faith whatever.”

ft Then cancel that demand in thy ar-cc tides <<f capitulation,” said the baron, with reviving spirits, tm and thy God shall tC be m\ God. Imogen, tis in \ain thou Cf wouldst throw me from thee, for in spite fr of all thv prudent scruples thou wilt <c still be mine.”

“Then, m\ lord,” said Imogen, with firmness and dignity, claim me openly “ from my father ; for the duty I owe my-“ self, independent of every other, will c< prevent me creeping meanly into a fa-mily which would reject me with con-“ tempt.”

et Imogen, you wish to drive me to dis-“ traction, to wrench from me the hope “ of being beloved, as well as the cer-“ tainty of being rejected Away with “ that air of proud and conscious virtue. No, madam, it is not virtue, it is indif-ference, which furnishes you with these

ST. DOMINICK.

351

“ all-prudent arguments. You bid me “ claim you from your father, because you ct know the count St Dorval would spurn <f me from his feet, if even there I kneel-ct ingsued him for his daughter. By hea-a vens, lady, \ou trifle with my passion, u and use me like a froward child, now <£ soothed and now corrected in its follies.” The baron arose, and paced the tent in great perturbation. Imogen, trembling at his violence, held out her hand to him, and, faintly smiling through her tears, exclaimed, Oh ! these are not your senti-“ ments. Thai too ardent affection which tc so candidly breathed its existence to “ your ears cannot be doubted. Alas! “ my lord, ere the secret of my heart “ was unfolded to myseif, thou wert its “ master.”

“ Imogen,” said the baron, calmed and softened by her lender address, and taking her offered hand, as he seated himself by her, (t Imogen, forgive me ; I know “ not what 1 say, I do not, dare not.

THE NOVICE OF

352

“ doubt the existence of thy affection. “ Hast thou not (O dear confession !) con-descended to own I once might have “ been all the world to thee. Oh ! let us “ still, my lovely friend, be all the world to each other. Thus prostrate at thy feet let me supplicate, let me implore Ci thee not to annihilate, by ill-timed cau-“ tion, that wondrous happiness we might i( enjoy by living for each other, and mu-tually exerting ourselves in the cause of Cf virtue ”

Imogen, almost overpowered by the energy, the passion, of the baron’s manner, and by arguments but too consonant to the tone of her heart’s secret wishes, yet still struggling to support herself through the difficult part that virtueand reason commanded her to support, faintly exclaimed: Rise, my lord ; that humiliating attitude “ is mockery to me and to yourself.” The baron arose : an angry blush glowed on his cheek. iC Yes,” continued Imogen firmly, “ we will mutually exert ourselves in the

ST. DOMINICK.

353

“ cause of virtue, but that can never be “ promoted by oùr union, except there is i{ a virtue in sacrificing* every considera-“ tion to our own desires, in breaking the heart of a tender parent, in violating a “ sacred promise, in perpetuating an here-

“ ditary discord, in----”

6i Pardon me, madam/* interrupted the baron coldly ; we are arguing on un-“ equal terms : you from the head, I from “ the heart, from the feelings, and cannot <c stoop to sarcasm. My ideas of virtue ff are not so very arbitrary as you appear H to imagine; they do not vary with the 6‘ dictates of my passion, they are perhaps fixed and immutable as your own. I “have done; I cannot combat the so-“ phistical arguments of a brain so fertile “ in conjuring up phantoms to scare the soul’s most ardent wishes/*

“ Oh no ; my dear, my best friend/* exclaimed Imogen, again taking the hand he had withdrawn from hers, give but “ thy understanding a moment’s sway, and

354

THE NOVICE OF

“ it will tell thee what I have urged are “ not phantoms, but the palpable beings “ of reason's own creation/*

And is true, fervent, and unalterable “ passion/’ said the baron, half tenderly, half reproachfully, " so very subservient ‘‘ to the influence of the understanding? “ Can its vital glow chill in the heart to the “ suggestion of reason, and its throbbing u pulse cease to beat when prudence com-<f mands ? O Imogen, you have never “ loved—by heavens, never !”

“ Never!** faintly repeated Imogen, turning her melting eyes full on him with a reproachful and tender smile : “ Never !” “ Oh ! forgive, forgive,” said the baron, pressing her folded hands to his eager lips. ‘‘ Imogen, it is you who drive me wild; “ then bear with the effects of your dan-“ gerous influence. Yes, it is a heart, a (( soul, tender, ardent, exalted as thine, iC that is alone capable of receiving the di-vine impression of love. Yes, you have “ loved. That sublime, that profound sen-



356	TIIX	NOVICE	OP

kindred heart, its fair hopes are never blighted. Love,, mutual love, is oroni-(< potent ; it is its own destiny.”

<c When love is opposed by virtue, my “ lord, it is not omnipotent; it is only in “ alliance with it, it is all-powerful. This

“ transient gust of passion over-----”

i( Transient gust!” repeated the baron with acrimony : “ but it is well. Yet trust ** me, lady, all-indifferent and cold as now “ I see thou art, thou art not so all-in-u different as thou wouldst believe. No, “ whatever thy pride may urge, thy pru-“ dence dictate, in confirming my misery “ you will not secure your own happiness. “ Imogen, Imogen, be thy heart the urn-pire between us, and it will tell thee we were formed for each other. And oh, my <f too reasoning, loo prudent friend, when, “ by this resistance to our mutual felicity, “ destiny shall for ever ever part us ; when “ death itself can only place a stronger u barrier between us; when we shall have “ beheld each other, heard each other, for

ST. DOMINICK.

357

“ the last, last time; when another shall (C claim those vows our eyes once so loudly . “ interchanged ; even when the diffidence ct of infant love shrinks from all other “ communication, and our hearts, mu-“ tually thrilling with the lingering ardor “ of their first immutable passion, shall “ shrink from the----”

u My lord, my lord, I’ll hear no more!’* interrupted Imogen in an agony of mind that mingled in her countenance all the ardor of the most refined, the most glowing passion. Struggling with the nearly overpowered resolves of virtue and of reason, ct Save me/* she cried, while tears dried on her burning cheeks ; “ O De <c Montargis, save me from thee, from tC myself !”

The baron caught her in his arms. ‘‘ The contest is over/’ he exclaimed. “ These tears, these blushes, are love’s “ own concession, and thou art mine for “ ever 1”

For a moment, one moment only, love

SbS

THE NOVICE OF

was indeed victorious. On the next, Imogen had released herself from the baron’s embrace, and, falling on her knees, in a solemn but rapid voice she exclaimed: ir I swear by all I hold most sacred, never f* to receive the baron de Montargis as my ff husband, but with the mutual consent of 4< our parents while they live/'

Then wholly overcome by the conflict, the emotion, the struggle, she had sustained, she fell pale and lifeless at the baron’s feet. Every feeling, every sensation, in the breast of de Montargis, was absorbed in that the late effort of mind, and the situation it had thrown her in ^awakened. He hung over her with the tender fears, the same intense anxiety, as the mother who trembles for the fluttering life of the infant that droops on her nurturing bosom. In delicacy to his prisoner he dared not call for assistance, and he was almost incapable of rendering any himself. Imogen, who, though overcome by corporeal weakness brought on by mental sufferings.

ST. DOMINICK.

359

was not senseless, made an effort to shake off the weakness that pressed her to the earth. The baron raised her in his arms. Imogen gently extricated herself, and tottered to a seat; while a faint and eloquent smile, and a slight motion of the head, seemed to deprecate that bodily infirmity in which the mind had no share.

“ Fear not,” said the baron in a low and affecting voice as she appeared to shrink from his approach : “ thou hast nothing ct more to fear from my importunity, since ct I have now nothing more to hope. I will “ at least endeavour to emulate that excel-tc lence I dare never expect to attain. O “ Imogen ! more omnipotent in thy virtue “ than even all the lustre of thy genius “ and thy charms, I submit : thou hast ‘c conquered. Yes, 1 resign thee; yet to “ the end of time I shall persist in think-“ ing thee mine by the most sacred ties that bind soul to soul. In another and a better world I will reclaim thee, and " the heaven which formed u« for each

360	TI1E	NOVICE,	&c.

« other will then smile upon our eternal reunion."

The baron’s voice faltered ; emotion checked his utterance. Imogen wept bitterly, and extended her hand towards him. He held it for a moment alternately to his forehead and his heart ; then, pressing it to his lips, dropped on it a burning tear, and, suddenly letting it fall, covered his face with his mantle, and rushed out of the tent.

CHAP. XIX.

Parting is worse than death, ’tis death of love.

---------------No stelle ingrate

Dal raio ben non spirate Devidenni per sempre, ad onta vostra Mi, regni dell* obblio M’unira questo ferro all’ idol mio.

Zenobia, atto primo. Metastassio.

THE baron’s absence was a sensible relief to Imogen; she dreaded the influence of his presence, his voice, his looks : nor was she thoroughly confident in herself, until he had left her; then, humbly prostrate on the earth, in the full emotion of a thankful heart, she offered up her grateful acknowledgements to him who had

4

THE NOVICE OF

vouchsafed her his protection in this the most trying conflict of her life. The indulgence of her soul’s pious effusions always shed a balm over her wounded mind, calmed the perturbation of her thoughts, and renovated her drooping spirits. She arose full of that soothing consciousness, of having acted right, which almost repays, by the self-approbation it brings with it, the sacrifice it imposes. The baron had not left her more than a quarter of an hour, when the page delivered her the following

Billet.

e Let not the sight of this hand-writing awaken thy virtuous fears, O most amiable of women. I repeat it, thou canst have nothing to apprehend, since thou hast wrenched from my heart its last fond lingering hope. O Imogen! the void! the dreadful void! And for ever! God of heaven! for ever! But whither would

ST. DOMINICK.

5

distraction lead me? It is now all—all over! This is merely to inform thee that thy father lives, is safe, and has sent the chevalier de Sorville hither to claim his child :—his child ! Oh, that child ! I have not yet seen my respected, my all-virtuous friend; he is in the royal tent, waiting till his majesty is at leisure to give him audience ; thither I shall join him, and return with him to your tent; I will deliver you to him ; to him, alone worthy of the sacred deposit ! and he will bear thee from me for ever ! In a few hours fancy only will whisper thy voice’s soft murmur to my ears, and give thy form to my eye. Imogen, be our loves secret, as they were sacred: let not thy father triumph in the sufferings of my heart; from mine it shall be everlastingly concealed, that the novice of St. Dominick is the daughter of St. Dorval. No! the holy mystery of our pure and tender loves shall never escape the hearts it has ennobled! Farewell! most beloved, most venerated of all hu-

G

THE NOVICE OF

man beings : in a little time we shall part, perhaps. Father of mercy ! to meet no more on this side heaven. But Faith has no surer empire than the heart of an unfortunate lover; for he, who loses the idol of his heart in this world, looks forward with a religious hope of possessing her in that which is to come. Here and hereafter eternally thine,

‘ De Montakgis/

The emotions which this billet awakened in Imogen’s bosom, all-dissolving, all-distracting as they were, were yet considerably softened by the intelligence it contained ; and, while her heart bled in agony over the sufferings of de Montargis, it throbbed with joy at the certainty of her father's safety, of her own restoration to his arms ; while tears of sorrow and of pleasure dropped in fond alternation over the billet, which she covered with kisses and consigned to her bosom.

Cf Yes/’ said she passionately, “ sacred

ST. DOMINICK.

7

“ be the mystery of our loves ! never, oh ! “ never shall it pass these lip3, sealed in “ the holy silence of virtue ; but with its object live for ever in my heart. Yes, ff de Montargis, I have resigned thee, but rf virtue exacts no more : and though it ie did it would not be obeyed ; for, while " this heart throbs with life, thou wilt be “ its first, its dearest, best beloved object.” Imogen then endeavoured to shake off the emotion which still agitated her frame; she bathed her face and eyes, arranged her dress, and continued to walk up and down the tent, gradually recovering strength of mind and body, and supporting her spirits by making her father, and her happy reunion to him, the sole object df her thoughts : while anxiety to appear not only composed, but to the greatest advantage, in the eyes of the noble and illustrious de Sorville, whose virtues and talents, as well as her singular connection with her first friend, the minor canoness of St. Dominick, excited the liveliest interest, revived

s

THE NOVICE OF

her usual wish to please, and shed a transient animation over her looks, her air, her countenance ; a faint colour flushed on her pale cheek, a languid fire beamed in her pensiv e eyes, and the flutter of ardent expectation touched her every motion with naiuelê.

Yet, when she heard the baron’s voice in the outward apartment, her heart sank within her breast, though her spirits rallied as the curtain drew back, and de Montar-gis, leading in the most interesting figure in the world, faintly pronounced, “ Mademoi-“ selle de St. Dorval”—<c The chevalier de “ Sorville.” With nearly the same emotions as Imogen felt, when for the first time her father acknowledged himself as such, she sprung forward to receive de Sorville, who, as her only parent’s better-self; as the lover of Pasiphae, the friend of de Montargis; and as the unknown sympathizer in her sorrows amidst the aisles of St. Dominick; seemed to her as the centre of all those various interests,

ST. DOMINICK.

9

feelings, and affections, her heart so profoundly cherished. The chevalier, with an air tenderly parental, but respectfully familiar, pressed her to his heart. “ For-“ give,” said he, as he released her, '‘‘oh ! “ forgive, sweet lady, this freedom ; it is the impulse of a heart overflowing with " joyous emotions, to which it has long “ been a stranger. Thou art the daughter of St. Dorval, and his child is mine ; I shared and witnessed the sufferings thy <f loss awakened. I share and witness the “ joy thy recovery bestows. Look at her, “ my lord, does she not resemble her mo-ffther? Such was Julia de Ribemont <f when I first beheld you a rosy boy “ sporting in her arms.”

The baron, who, pale and spiritless, was leaning over a chair for support, in an attitude and with a look of the deepest despondency, faintly replied :

“ I have a very slight recollection of “ madame de St. Dorval, and cannot judge “ of the resemblance.” b 2

THE NOVICE OF

“ But my father/* said Imogen eagerly, and pressing the chevalier’s hand, as he seated himself by her, “ speak to me only “ of my father/'

“ His wounds are not dangerous/7 said the chevalier, “ and he is fast recovering. “ I was at the chateau de Rosemont when his despatches reached me; merciful <c heaven ! how deeply did their contents <f touch my heart I’7 Imogen perceived the violent emotion that agitated the chevalier’s bosom as bespoke, and recollected the letter of the dying nun : the chevalier, after an affecting pause, continued : “ A “ tender melancholy tie then bound me to de Rosemont ; although my sister had left it, yet I flew from my solitude to “■ the camp, and found thy father just re-turned from an unsuccessful expedition, €< by which a second time he lost his cc child. The phrenzy of his mind in-ft creased his bodily sufferings, and even “ his senses were impaired. I procured ft leave of absence from the duke de

ST. DOMINICK.

11

“ Mayenne for my suffering friend, and c< removed him from the tumult and hor-“ ror of the camp, where all was conster-u nation and dismay from the late decisive defeat. Having placed him under the “ care of a skilful surgeon, and in a sweet "and peaceful retreat in the village of c‘ Nivemont, I cheered his spirits with the “ hope of your safety and restoration, and fC set off instantly in search of you; with “ how much success, this most happy in-“ terview evinces. The village of Nive-<f mont is scarce ten leagues from hence ; ff I have a carriage and fresh horses wait-<c ing at the entrance of the tent, and this “ evening I shall have the happiness of “ placing you in your father’s arms : for <c the king has behaved with his usual ‘‘ goodness and generosity, and has even “ refused to accept your personal acknow-iC ledgments, c lest,’ as he gallantly says, “ he should pay the ransom of your cap-“ tivity with his own, and in his turn be-“ come your prisoner.”

12

THE NOVICE OF

“ Then/’ said Imogen faintly, yet struggling for firmness, “ there is nothing “ I suppose to prevent my instant depar-“ ture.”

‘r Nothing/* said the chevalier, <c to cc prevent, but every thing to urge it.”

The baron, casting a look of reproach, of agony, on Imogen, turned towards the chevalier, and endeavoured to enter into conversation. At that moment the servants appeared with refreshments; Imogen attempted to do the honours of the table, but her hands trembled, and the tears every moment rushed to her eyes.

The baron, unable to command the least presence of mind, remained silent and abstracted. The chevalier alone talked with ease and cheerfulness, and commended the repast, which he confessed a long fast rendered peculiarly grateful.

Imogen now, for the first time, gratified her eager curiosity, by gazing on the person of one who had so long, though unknown, awakened her veneration and rc-

ST. DOMINICK.

13

spect. The prevailing character of his figure and countenance was interest. It was impossible to behold him without emotion: his form, thin and slight almost to emaciation, rose not beyond the middle stature; his countenance wore the traces of affliction tempered by philosophy ; of profound penetration softened by benevolence ; as if that keen perception of mind, which penetrated through every fold of the human heart, discovered the vices, or detected the errors of mankind, was ever pursued by that benevolence which pitied while it condemned. Ilis large full eyes, of dark grey, were searching in their pointed glances, but soft and interesting in their general expression ; his brow, arched and knit, though never harshly drawn, wore a pensive contraction, the apparent effectof habitual melancholy : while the furrows of his finely-formed forehead seemed rather the traces of deep reflection than of years. His complexion was wan and pale, yet subject to transient glows ; and

THE NOVICE OF

though the general character of his countenance and manner was gravity, yet both were occasionally illuminated with animation and lire. He was dressed in deep mourning, and appeared scarcely to have passed his fortieth year. Imogen, as she gazed on him, gradually recognised the original of that picture she had seen with the sister Pasiphae; the lustre of the eye was indeed faded, the lip’s light smile ceased to ploy, and youth’s warm blushes no longer crimsoned the cheek ; but the soul, which gave expression to the whole, still illumined every feature, and irradiated every look. His voice too was no stranger to her ear ; it still possessed the same deep pathos of tone as when it first awakened her fears amidst the midnight horrors of St. Dominick.

From her ardent contemplation of this truly-striking, this admirable and interesting object, she was roused by a loud sigh which escaped the baron’s lips. She started, but dared not encounter his eyes. The

ST. DOMINICK.

15

chevalier arose, Imogen and the baron followed his example, and the chevalier desired the page to order his servants to draw up the carriage to the entrance of the tent : then, taking Imogen by the hand, said he was ready to attend her. A silence of a moment ensued, her hand trembling in his grasp, her heart sank, died, within her bosom.

The chevalier, without appearing to notice her emotion, loosed her hand, and advanced to the outward apartment, to give some orders to his attendants.

Then Imogen, faint, and almost wholly overcome, turned her eyes upon the baron; he approached her with a tottering step ; the ashy paleness of death bleached his cheek ; love, agony, and despair, mingled their expression in his countenance. “ Imo-

gen V3 he faintly exclaimed, gazing ardently on her, Imogen !" but he could pronounce her name only.

Imogen sank upon a chair, and wept bitterly.

The baron fell at her feet, seized her

THE NOVICE OF

trembling hands, and pressed them to his lips.

Imogen, in a perturbation that shook her frame almost to dissolution, arose : “■ Forbear,’1 she faintly articulated, “ O <fde Montargis, in mercy !”

Imogen,” he wildly exclaimed, f<r you cannot, dare not, refuse me this last sad r‘ indulgence; yet a few short moments, and I shall never behold thee more.”

“ Never!” replied Imogen shuddering, never !”

At thal moment some one entered the outward apartment. Imogen would have rushed by the baron, but his extended arms withheld her; he pressed her to his heart; the curtain moved ; she burst from his embrace—the chevalier appeared; scarcely knowing what she did, she caught his arm, and faintly said, Now I am ready.”

He led her forward, and placed her in the vehicle ; then returned to speak to the baron, but he was not to be found ; he followed Imogen into the carriage, the blinds

ST. DOMINICK.

17

were drawn to frustrate the intrusion of impertinent curiosity, and the carriage drove rapidly away. Imogen sank back, closed her eyes, and, unmindful of the chevalier’s presence, gave a boundless scope to her emotions.

Unstifled sighs died upon her lips, unconscious tears swelled her eyes, and bathed her colourless cheeks.' To the pang, the dreadful pang, of parting succeeded the soothing recollection of her late enjoyed happiness ; that soft interchange of ideas, that intelligent communion of mind, that reciprocity of sentiment and opinion, the grateful homage paid not only to her person, but her virtues and her genius ; and those tender ardent protestations of unalterable, of enthusiastic love, which even in memory shed a glow through her sinking heart, and animated her drooping spirit.

Yes,” thought she, to be worthy of “ the love of such a being, and to possess V it, is bliss supreme ; thus blessed 1 must

18

THE NOVICE OF

not, will not, complain. In proportion “ as it is valuable, the sacrifice I have te made of it to virtue spreads a profound “ self-created satisfaction through my “ soul : for, O Virtue ! even thy tears are

sweet !”

Then the idea of that long-suffering parent, for whose sake this immolation of her heart’s present felicity had been made, shot across her mind : the joy of their reunion ; the comfort her presence would convey to his wearied heart ; the calm and gentle destiny that awaited her future days; the happiness she would derive in lengthening outlier fathers existence, by watchful care and tender solicitude; and the useful, improving, and tranquil, life she should lead in the bosom of her family, and in the society of her inestimable parent and his virtuous friend,—awakened a hope, that, from the wreck of her heart’s first wishes, some fragments of felicity might be yet secured to enrich her future life. Already she beheld joy sparkling in the

• ST. DOMINICK.	19

eye of her father as he again pressed lier to his bosom ; already she beheld the rose of health shed its glow on his cheek, and lier own flushed with the hope, and coloured with its orient hue tiie lingering tear which had not yet dried upon its polished surface ; then, conscious of the presence of her silent associate, she raised her eyes, and observed his fixed in a penetrating glance upon her face.

Imogen, colouring and confused, attempted to apologize for her silence and stupidity.

“ Nay,” said the chevalier abruptly, 66 let me not stem the course of thy reflec-“ tions : thus, sweet child of nature, may ‘‘ they ever flow to the impulses of thy *1 heart and fancy ! Unsophisticated and “ unrestrained, long may thy animated and “ tender feelings indulge their sweet and “ glowing reveries ! Long may the tear “ of grateful sensibility fill thine eye, the iC smile of joy play over thy lip, and the “ blush of hope and pleasure warm thy

THE NOVICE OF

“ cheek! But the world and experience “ will struggle to bereave thee of these “ sweet and profound emotions; and when “ it gives a mechanical impulse to thy (i passions and thy feelings, then wilt thou “ pursue the shadows, and live upon the 'f recollection of these dreams of the soul, “ which so seldom, oh ! so very seldom, “ survive the blissful era of youth.”

This speech, though so consonant to the enthusiastic temper of Imogen’s mind, rather increased than lessened her confusion. She again attempted to apolo-logize for her abstraction, and the chevalier again interrupted her.

“ Have I not/’ said he, ffan hereditary (i claim on your friendship ? and yet will <c you deny me the privilege of a friend, 6i that of dismissing all formality and ce-<< remonious observance of the cold forms “ of common-place etiquette, so destruc-<c tive too frequently of the most interest-C( ing movements of the heart and mind ? “ Such I am sure were yours, my sweet 2 companion.”

ST. DOMINICK.

21

“ My heart was indeed full of pleasant <c hopes and ardent expectation that my <c presence would restore my father to ‘‘ health and happiness/5 said Imogen, casting down her eyes.

“ And the reflection that anteceded that u pleasant filial hope/5 said the chevalier, with a penetrating glance, “ was tinged « with a grateful recollection of the deli-“ cate and polite attentions of your late 4t noble and generous host; and with some “ degree of natural regret at so soon relinquishing so valuable, so accomplished “ a friend.”

Imogen, with a cheek crimsoned with blushes, and eyes that expressed amazement at what at the moment appeared supernatural penetration, faintly replied, that the baron de Montargis had indeed ‘ taken 1 captivity captive,’ and had behaved to her with a delicacy, a refinement, a noble and disinterested generosity, which, during her residence at the royal camp, had left no one uneasy sensation on her mind, but

THE NOVICE OF

what her fears and anxieties for her father awakened.

c< Such a conduct,” said the chevalier, “ is perfectly consonant to the principles, u the sentiments, and character, of this il-lustrious young nobleman, than whom “ France boasts not a nobler. From the “ moment I heard you were taken pri-et soner, it was my anxious hope that you “ had fallen into his hands ; while, next “ to the prayer your father offered up for ic your safety, was one that you might es-Cc cape the power of de Montargis.” iC Yes,” said Imogen sighing, “ the “ evening previous to our departure my “ father taught me to avoid that fate as <e the most dreadful that coulcl befal me : “ he bade me too, if possible, conceal my ic name and rank ; but the baron found me “ in a situation that prohibited mystery.”

“ The baron,” said the chevalier, “ in C( a conversation we had previous to my Ci introduction to you, related to me the “ circumstances under which he found

ST. DOMINICK.

23

“ you. Good God ! how touching how “ interesting was your situation, and in “ what pathetic, what glowing colours tc was it described ! The baron seemed c( to forget it was the daughter of the count “ de St. Dorval who was the heroine of “ his tale; and will not you, my sweet (t friend, in relating to your father the ge-ce nerosity, the kindness, and benevolence, tf of your amiable conqueror, forget he “ also is your enemy by inheritance ?”

Oh !” said Imogen eagerly, suffer u me to depute you as the interpreter of “ my sentiments and gratitude to my fa-tf ther. Ungrateful I cannot, will not be, “ even for a parent : and he would proba-cc bly spare the encomium of his enemy “ from the lips of his child. I am not yet <f sufficiently established in his heart to €* run the risk of losing my enviable hopes cc of its possession by the gratification of “ my own feelings. ”

I understand you,” said the chevalier pointedly 5 <( I enter into the nature of

/

24	THE	NOVICE	OF

“ those feelings ; I am conscious that the source from whence they spring is pure cf and elevated. I am honoured by the ff task you have assigned me, and I trust I “ shall not prove myself deficient in its performance. The subject in question ft will probably never be discussed be-tween your father and yourself. He will C( certainly not be over-eager to recur to “ it; for, in this instance, the generosity of his nature will be counteracted by the u force of prejudice and the influence of “ pride. He will feel, in all the sympathy c< of kindred heroism, the noble conduct of “ the younger de Montar gis ; but, stung by mortifications, from owing such a cf depth of kindness to an open and pro-ff fessed enemy, he will shrink from ad-Éf verting to it, until an opportunity of re-turning it is afforded him. Oh! why ie dare not man be himself? Why is he c< ever the voluntary victim of passion and of prejudice ? Why does he submit his “ happiness, and even his virtue, to the

ST. DOMINICK.

25

“ empire of hereditary error, when by one bold effort of the soul he could burst his “ disgraceful bondage, and restore him-“ self to the divine influence of reason, ‘f truth, and philosophy ? Why, O noble <f and excellent de St. Dorval ! why da-“ rest thou not stretch the hand of amity iC and reconcilement to thy generous ene-my, and press to thy bosom a heart ff which throbs, in all the kindred sympa-thy of virtue, to thy own ?” f< Why, oh ! why?” echoed the heart of Imogen, while her lips moved in silence; but the glance which met the chevalier's, the sigh which accompanied it, spoke, and was understood.

De Sorville pressed her hand tenderly ; then, leaning back and closing his eyes, appeared to fall into a profound reverie; and Imogen again plunging into the train of reflection she had before indulged in, they continued their route in silence, interrupted only at intervals by a few casual observations on the scenery through which

VOL. HI.

B

TUE NOVICE OF

they passed, until towards the decline of evening they reached the beautiful village of Nivemont.

Sequestered from the scene of warfare and tumult, reposing at the base of a stupendous mountain, whose summit was now illumined with the sun's last fading beam, its calm and peaceful appearance formed a striking contrast to the natural and moral disorder they had lately witnessed. To the unyielding and desolated fields succeeded a rich and smiling pasturage ; to the furious and contending multitude who over-ran and despoiled them, groupes of industrious and cheerful peasantry ; while the loud laugh of happy ignorance or infantine hilarity replaced the martial tone of the war-horn’s shrill blast.

At the extremity of the village, and almost concealed by the deep umbrage of a mulberry-plantation, then rich in its snowy blossoms, lay the temporary residence of the wounded St. Dorval.

ST. DOMINICK.

27

From the moment the chevalier pointed out its white chimneys and blue curling smoke to Imogen, her heart’s palpitation increased until they reached its simple portal. She gave her trembling hand to de Sorville, who led her into a small but neat apartment, and then went to inform the count of her arrival. The intervening minutes were passed by Imogen in irrepressible emotion, and when the chevalier returned she was faint and spiritless.

ct Your father,” said he, “ has borne f< the news of your recovery better than, “ from his weak state, could have been expected ; and he is now more agitated “ by his impatience to see you, than he ci could even be by your presence/" He then led her to the apartment of her wounded parent; the curtain of his bed was drawn aside, and the crimson flush of the horizon, as it glowed on the casement, shed a faint tint over his emaciated form, which was supported by pillows, while his feeble arms were eagerly extended to re-

28

THE NOVICE OF

ceive the child who had risked her own life to preserve his. She sprang forward to fill them, and he fainted in her embrace, but soon recovered under the influence of his daughter’s tender and solicitous cares. The affectionate pressure of her hand revived the flagging pulse of his; and her warm tears, as they bathed his cheek, recalled to its ashy surface the vital glow of fading existence. He opened his languid eyes, and fixed for a minute their ardent gaze on Imogen ; then raising them meekly to heaven, offered up a silent prayer, and again embraced her for whose sake it was preferred. The chevalier gazed on the affecting scene through tears of sympathizing feeling; while the count, the first flush of his emotion subsided, looked with a delighted smile on his charming daughter, then directed a triumphant glance to his friend ; and taking a hand of each, as they sat on either side his bed, he exclaimed, ff This is to be blessed indeed !” At that moment the surgeon, who was present.

ST. DOMINICK.

29

observing* the scarlet tint that flashed his patient’s cheek, and the feverish throb that fluttered his pulse, reminded him that he had not slept for near thirty hours, and that the cause of his wakeful anxiety being thus happily removed, he should endeavour to take that salutary repose on which his recovery so much depended. Imogen instantly caught the hint, and pleaded lier own extreme fatigue as a secondary cause for her retiring.

The count, unwilling to lose sight of her, expressed not a desire to sleep, but an anxious wish to hear an account of those incidents which had befallen lier during their separation.

Imogen coloured, and looked at the chevalier, who said, ei My dear friend, it is late ; mademoiselle de St. Dorval is faint tf and exhausted, and stands almost in as much need of rest as yourself. I, how-“ ever, am perfectly informed of every cir-“ cumstance attendant on her late extra-<f ordinary adventure, and you must ac-

THE NOVICE OF

30

te cept of my narration, until recovered

health and spirits will enable her to give “ it a new interest, by becoming the rela-“ tor herself."

Apprehension for the health of his child subdued every other sensation in the bosom of the count. An elderly female, to whom the house belonged, was summoned to attend her j and St. Dorval, with a thousand tender intreaties that she would take care of herself, if she wished him to live, kissed her cheek, and suffered her to retire.

When Imogen had reached the little parlour which she had before occupied, she found a neat but simple supper already laid out by her active hostess, who, with unceasing loquacity, dwelt on the sufferings of monseigneur the count, his anxiety about mademoiselle his daughter, the excellence of her own cream cheese, the low state of the markets, the honour conferred on her humble dwelling by the residence of such illustrious guests, and the hatred, envy? and malice, it would excite in her

ST. DOMINICK.

SI

less fortunate neighbours ; and Imogen was already deep in the domestic politics of the village, when the chevalier joined her. As soon as supper was served, the attendants and hostess were dismissed ; and de Sorville informed Imogen, that the detail which he had briefly made the count had listened to in strong and evident emotion, but that he had madeno commenton the conduct of the baron de Montargis, except that once, when the chevalier dwelt with peculiar energy on the refined generosity of this amiable young nobleman,, the count exclaimed with vehemence :

“ It is thus I would have acted, had the u fortune of war thrown him in my power. iC But his father would not have uncler-“ stood this refined mode of triumph ; he t{ would have crushed to the earth my “ lovely, my innocent sufferer, had she iC fallen his victim.’*

tc And will he not,” said Imogen, f< make “ some acknowledgment to the generous “ son of his inveterate enemy ?"

32

THE NOTICE OF

“ I dared not, in the present moment, “ urge it,” returned the chevalier : “the “ count, I fear, thinks it would look like et seizing on the opportunity to effect a re-c< concilement between the families, which “ I believe he would never consent to, cc much less appear to solicit.5’

Imogen’s only replication was a profound sigh ; and the chevalier, observing the heaviness of her eyes, the paleness of her cheek, and the depression of her spirits, insisted on her retiring to rest, and conducted her himself to the door of the apartment prepared for her.

Once more alone and unobserved, her heart fondly and impulsively reverted to its long-treasured object of cogitation. As she divested herself of her attire, the picture of the baron de Montargis felt from her bosom, where she had deposited it with the billet which had enwrapt it. Had she, in that moment of emotion, retained any presence of mind to form a determination, it would have been to return this

ST. DOMINICK.

33

precious shadow to the original ; but the

succeeding conflicts she had endured dis-©

sipated every idea unconnected with themselves, and the fond weakness of her enamoured heart now triumphed in the inadvertency of her mind. “ Yes/' said she, gazing tenderly on the almost-living resemblance, “ it is not yet a crime to re-“ tain thee, though it is a weakness ; it “ is not yet a crime to recall that moment “ when the glance of those eloquent eyes “ first met mine ; when those lips first “ emitted the accents of a voice whose “■melting tone sunk to my heart; but “ when this fond indulgence shall cease “ to receive the sanction of virtue, as it “ now does of prudence, then, O precious “ image ! thou shalt receive my last adieu.” Imogen pressed the picture to her lips, and placing it in the last incoherent letter she had received from the baron de Montargis, she deposited for the night the precious packet beneath her pillow, which, though not strewn with roses, was yet not

34

THE NOVICE OF

scattered with thorns ; while the repose which exhausted nature bestowed wa*s illumined by those glowing images the dream of fancy stole from the fond wishes of the heart, and sweetened by that proud self-approbation which conscious virtue ever bestows.

CHAP. XX.

Though the poisonous charms Of baleful Superstition guide the feet Of servile numbers thro’ a dreary way, a gentler star Your lovely search illumines.

Proceed exulting to th’ eternal shrine,

Where Truth conspicuous with her sisters twain, The undivided partners of her sway,

With Good and Beauty reigns.

Akenside.

THE dawn bad scarcely glanced through the casement of Imogen's apartment, when she arose and dressed herself, then hurried to her father’s room. All there was profound stillness, the count still

ST. DOMINTCK.

35

asleep, and his two attendants, each in their chair, gave audible intimation of the profound repose they enjoyed. Theclose-drawn curtains faintly admitted the dawn's strengthening light; a lamp still burnt on the table. Imogen, delighted to observe and cautious of disturbing her father’s soft and salutary slumber, crept with noiseless step to his bed, and, kneeling beside it, offered up with her morning orisons a prayer for the recovery of her parent’s health. Thus devoutly occupied, a light footstep caught her attention ; it was the chevalier deSorville, who stopped abruptly and gazed earnestly on her. Imogen with a smile put her finger on her lip to impose silence. The chevalier walked gently to the other side of the bed, and seated himself in a large antique arm-chair. Imogen, without rising from her recumbent posture, reposed her head on the counterpane, and fixed her affectionate looks on the pale and interesting countenance of her father, which was overspread with a placid

36

THE NOVICE OF

benignity that gradually animated into an expression of joy,, and he faintly pronounced the name of Imogen.

“ I am here, dearest father,” she replied. The count started, gazed earnestly at her, then at the chevalier, and with a smile, extending a hand to either, he exclaimed : “ Then it was no dream. My ef beloved child, my dear friend, I behold, I embrace you both ; and the blissful “ vision of my sleep is not for once suc-ec ceeded by the waking consciousness of “ my misery. Oh ! I have often dreamed “ thus, but never thus awakened/’

The count alternately embraced his daughter and his friend, and their anxious enquiries returned the grateful assurance that his mind was becoming the physician of his body, and that another such night of uninterrupted repose would add twenty years to his life. During the rest of the day Imogen scarcely lest her father’s bedside for a moment, assisted at the dressing of his wounds, presented every thing he

ST. DOMINICK.,

37

tasted with her own hands, was silent when the physician commanded silence, and amusingly conversant when she observed her father listened with delighted attention without exhausting himself by participating in the conversation ; and, as she hovered round him with endearing attention, she appeared like the rosy semblance of Health shedding her renovating influence over the pillow of sickness and affliction.

Dame Marguerette, their hostess, was commissioned to furnish Imogen with the best wardrobe that could be procured for the present; and in the evening she returned with some fine linen and a few simple but elegant dresses, purchased at a neighbouring town. The following day Imogen, as she sat by her father’s bedside, amused herself with altering and adapting these dresses to her own sylph-like form ; while the chevalier wrote letters at the other end of the room, and the count, more composed than he had been the preceding day, in calm delight contemplated

38

THE NOVICE OF

these objects so dear to his heart. Under the potent spell of his long-lost child’s endearing attentions his health and strength perceptibly returned ; and his wounds, no longer irritated by the fever which the agitations of his mind and spirits communicated to his whole frdme, healed so fast, that in a few days the surgeon’s residence beneath the same roof became unnecessary, and his attendance was reduced to a daily visit. At the expiration of a week he was enabled to leave his bed ; and as he reclined on a couch, and inhaled the fresh air which an open casement admitted, Imogen, still hovering round him, administered to his mind and gaiety an exhaustless cordial, in the variety and charms of her conversation and the gaiety and infantine playfulness of her manner, becoming hourly more attached to the amiable author of her being, more profoundly alive to the sense of that duty which bound her to him, than if she had been always habituated to the strongest tie which nature twines round the human

ST. DOMINICK.

39

heart. Daring her daily attendance on her father she suffered no truant thought to lure her attention from the track filial piety had marked out; and if, when alone and unobserved, she cast from her casement one tender longing glance towards the plains of Laon ; if her soft sigh mingled with the midnight breeeze, and her warm tears fell amidst the midnight dews; yet with the returning: morning* the sensations of the mistress gave way to the feelings of the child, and the smile of filial affection chased the pensive gloom of mourning love. With all that native strength of mind by which she was so eminently dis-tinguished^ with all that natural ingenuous candour which so obviously characterised her unsophisticated manner, she still retained much of the bashful shyness of the recluse, the natural result of that cloistral privacy in which she was brought up, and which intimacy and habit alone could vanquish, except when some striking incident or circumstance revealed the native splen-

40

TUE NOVICE OF

dor of her mind; then, and then only, her timidity, her reserve, and diffidence, disappeared, and genius and reason asserted their divine rights To the chevalier de Sorville she continued almost as much a stranger as she was the first day of their acquaintance. That melancholy abstraction which she attributed to the recent death of his unfortunate mistress, whom, notwithstanding his knowledge of her intimacy with Pasiphaë, he had not yet mentioned to her; his silent and reserved manners, with the eminent superiority his elevated and acknowledged virtues conferred on him; impressed her with awe, and inspired reverential esteem rather than that familiar affection so consonant to the tenderness of her heart. More attracted by the splendid than the solid virtues, because experience had not taught her to appreciate the full value of the latter, while the former were reflected through the dazzling medium of imagination, she expected to find in the chevalier de Sorville all those

ST. DOMINICK.

41

fascinatinggraces, those heroic sentiments, and those sanguine and impetuous feelings, which, through the influence of sympathy, had captivated her in the character of the baron de Montargis : but disappointment hung upon the hope; and virtue, divested of enthusiasm and the graces, appeared under a less-attractive aspect than she had hitherto contemplated it. A novice even in laudable simulation, she could not conceal the reserve and awe with which the chevaliers presence struck her. If he abruptly entered the room while with her animated prattle she chased the spirit of languor from her father’s couch, her gaiety disappeared, though not her cheerfulness ; or if, while the chevalier read or wrote in one part of the count’s room while in the other she frolicked round her father with the airy spirit of a sylphiad, she caught his eye averted from his book or his pen, and earnestly fixed on her, she blushed, and, construing his glance into a tacit reprehension of her childishness, suddenly became sedate and still.

TIIE NOVICE OP

Thus situated a fortnight had elapsed, and the count’s descent to the parlour formed a little epocha of felicity to his family, when a courier arrived from Paris with several packets. Those addressed to the count were merely on business from his agent and steward. The chevalier, whose correspondence was extensive and interesting, retired to read his alone. When he returned, the count asked him if his letters brought any news?

“ Yes/’ he replied ; (C something in the “ political way, not uninteresting : but an “ invalid should have nothing to do with <f politics ; besides, we have tacitly agreed “ to avoid their discussion.”

iC Do thou then, my dear chevalier, “ think me so very near the other world “ as to be totally indifferent to what is “ passing in this?” with a faint smile, yet with some degree of petulance, asked the count.

“ I am at least sufficiently anxious to keep you in this,” said the chevalier af-

ST. DOMIÎÎICK.

43

fectionately, not to agitate your mind, and consequently retard your recovery,

“ by------”

“ I suppose Laon is taken,’* interrupted the count with the peevish impatience of an invalid.

•* That you must have expected,” said the chevalier : “ a miracle only could have “ saved it after the defeat of the convoy. ” The chevalier then, taking up a letter, read the following passage:

ft The victorious king has returned to Paris to treat of a peace with the Duke de Lorraine ; and the duke de Mayenne, seeing his nephew de Guise and the chiefs of the League disposed to an accommodation, it is currently reported, will also make submission to his majesty. The young duke de Guise has solicited the king through the medium of his mother and his beautiful sister Louisa. The insinuating duchess exerts all the graces of persuasion in the interesting négociation ; and her native eloquence, animated by those warm effu-

THE NOVICE OF

sions of heart the cause inspires, pleads with irresistible force for her rebel son. The other day, as she stood conversing at a window in the Louvre with his majesty on the subject nearest her soul, he exclaimed with his usual energy, Cousin, what is it you demand ? I can refuse you nothing. The young duke has consequently obtained permission to throw himself at the king s feet; who, with his usual generosity, substituted caresses for reproach, and honours him with the title of nephew. Not only the duke, but all of the penitent nobles who have submitted, experience this generous treatment, are admitted to his most select parties of pleasure, and received even in his most private societies with that boundless confidence which experienced attachment and fidelity are supposed only to inspire. What a lesson to the few who still obstinately adhere to the standard of unavailing opposition 1”

ff Say rather,” interrupted the count.

ST. DOMINICK.

45

“ what a lure to seduce patriotism and “ principle from the standard of indepen-“ dence and honour, to bow at the shrine “ of servility and interest.”

“ Patriotism !” repeated the chevalier with more than usual energy: ct Oh ! for “ ever sacred be that principle, which in* “ eludes the existence of every social, “ every public virtue ; which, like the sun’s “ genial glow, diffuses its influence with “indiscriminate benefit! He who nou-“ rishes within his soul the pure, the in-w violable spark of patriotism ; who is de-“ voted with all the energies of his intel-“ lectual and corporeal being to support ° the liberty, the independence, the moral “ good, and political safety of his coun-“ try; who opposes his individual exertions “ to the arm of oppression, to the threat of invasion, to the power of tyranny, “ whether foreign or domestic; who on “ the altar of the public weal offers up the sacrifice of hia private views and in-terest ; who looks on the land which

THE NOVICE OF

ff gave him birth as his parent, and on her “ children as his brethren ; who holds to ff the mirror of recollection the past splen-“ dor and dauntless virtues of her ancient <f state, and opposes the glorious reflec-“ tion to the feeble efforts of modern de-“ generacy ; and who disseminates around “ him those principles which he so pro-foundly feels ; let his name be enrolled “ on the annals of immortality above “ that of the greatest conquerors of the ft earth, and let succeeding generations “ do homage to his memory, and emulate “ as they reverence his virtues : but ne-“ ver, O never, let the glorious name of patriotism be wrested to the purposes “ of narrovv-souled faction or party pre-“ judice.”

“ Faction !” repeated the count warmly; you do not call the League a faction, “ which had for its object the protection cc of the state against tyranny, and the de-“ fence of religion against schism r”

4€ That was the pretence of the confe-

ST. DOMINICK.

47

e( deration formed by the house of Lor-raine, my dear count, not the motive ; “ for how few of the multifarious crowd " who clung to their standard were ac-“ tuated by the pure love of their coun-(t try, or the mild and beneficent spirit of “ true religion? No: if we closely in-vestigate the conduct and principles of “ these nominal patriots, we sliall find rf them influenced by motives of private “ pique and personal resentment, by rest-less ambition or desperate fortune ; lf breathing the factious spirit of party, “ not the universal spirit of public good, <c and filled with that persecuting sectarian “ zeal which unites the energy of enthu-“ siasm to the self-supposed infallibility of " ignorance, and superstition sanctions the horrors of fanaticism with the sacred “ name of religion. Such were, I believe, “ the motives and principles which influ-“ enced the aggregate of the Leaguers; “ and even many, too many, members of y the opposite and royal party were not

48

THE NOVICE OF

“ free from the influence of prejudice,, iC bigotry, and intolerance. Yet still there were many also who followed the for-ff tunes of the duke de Guise from pure <c but mistaken principles of right, of « which you, my lord, and many other virtuous and illustrious characters, are “ a proof: but the conviction of this error a has been followed by its recantation,

“ and-----”

“ And the conviction of my error, my “ dear chevalier, shall also be followed by cC its recantation ; but it is from conviction only I shall submit. Let those who cC can meanly from interested views crouch “ at the feet of this royal political con-€C vert, whose faith knows no standard but (i his interest. I have only attached my-<6 self to a party whose object was toanui-hilate tyranny; I have only fought in a ct cause for which in ages back my ances-“ tors bled in the fields of Palestine. Would “ you have me supplicate the royal pardon ff for that, and introduce a new system of

ST. DOMINICK.

49

(i political principles and religious faith “ into my family, merely because apostacy “ was the fashion of the day?”

“ My dear count, we too often take up “ our religious and political ^opinions by “ inheritance, and defend them as we c‘ should our estates, merely because they “ descend to us from our forefathers : but cf to cherish a prejudice because it is an-“ tiquated, or was the governing principle ff of our ancestors, must lead to everlast-ec ing error, and stop the progressive in-<f fluence of all that tends to wisdom, “ knowledge, or happiness. Do you re-ff collect, my dear friend, when we studied “ together at Leyden, with the old Dutch 61 philosopher, what devotees we were to cC the substantial forms of Aristotle and “ the solid spheres of Ptolemy, as our u fathers were before us? Shortly after <( we went to England, conversed with Ba-“ con, read his manuscript tracts, em-braced the new light effused from the “ mind of the wondrous Englishman, and vol. hi.	c

50

THE NOVICE OF

“ smiled at the obstinate errors of our “ sires ?”

<c Are we then, chevalier, to draw in-‘c ferences from the lesser concernments of “ science to regulate the more important fc duties of life ? In politics and religion, “ shall not the experience of our ancestors “ and the sanction of ages at least direct “ us?”

“ They should serve as beacons, my 61 friend, not as guides. Let us profit by “ their errors, not embrace them merely

because they were theirs. God has en-“ dued each of his creatures with a suf-“ ficient portion of reason to guide him <e through this life to life eternal. He “ has endowed him with a moral agency “ to judge for himself: if he act up to “ the best of that judgment he stands no “ further accountable. But how few are “ they who see with their own eyes, and “hear with their own ears; who take <f the trouble to investigate the moral “ principles by which they are governed

ST. DOMINICK.

51

“ in this life, or the faith by which they “ are to be saved in that to come ?— “ No : to stifle the impulse of reason, to te walk on in the beaten path maiked out “by his predecessors, to think and believe “ as those who preceded him thought and “ believed, such is the lot of man, rich in his own imperishable treasures, yet “ too indolent to explore the mine from “ whence they sprang. The scanty pro-/( portion of reflection and belief which he " possesses is borrowed from the frugal <f store of others ; and should one awaken-“ ing effort of reason, one beam of na-e< ture’s light, rouse his slumbering intel-

O '	O

“ lectual energy, or flash conviction on ff bis mind, timidly clinging to the bosom “ of prejudice, he shrinks in cowardly fear “ from the divine impulse, and, infatuated “ with error flies from the influence of “ truth. Oh ! were it not so, would reli-“ gion, the intended source of all happi-“ ness, become the inexhaustible spring ct of human misery ? Were not the use-

52

THE NOVICE OF

<f less forms and unmeaning ceremonies with which the folly of man has clothed “ it of much greater consideration to man-“ kind than its essence, would it become the source of every species of persecu-<f tion ? In the variety of sects into which “ the Christian world is portioned, has one principle of morality or religon been <f the cause of their division ? Do they “ not all agree in the belief of a God that loves virtue ; and that which he loves “ must be best? Then why does fanaticism plunge the sword into the bosom of the “ opposing sectarian, but to support the Cl infallibility of some speculative point, “ some idle form, unconnected with reli-gion, if not foreign to its interest? Why “ does the Christian endeavour to persecute “ his brother Christian into a belief of some tenet which he himself confesses he does not comprehend, and which, were it “ immutably true, would need no such “ coercive enforcement? O my lord^ had your brave and illustrious ancestors

ST. DOMINICK.

53

r‘ dared to have thought for themselves, they would not have united themselves to that assassinating band, who, under “ the sanction of religion, spread horror “ and desolation through the finest coun-<' tries of Europe and Asia; a lawless ban-“ ditti, who raised the standard of murder “ and oppression under the command of “ barbarity and fanaticism. And pardon tc me, count, if I say, dared you but think “ for yourself, you would condemn their (t errors and avoid them. O mv dear a friend! behold that innocent being,” pointing to Imogen ; ft the light of heaven “ still, I trust, lives in her bosom, un-“ clouded by prejudice or error ; her heart “ glows with affection for her species, and “ her mind lias not yet imbibed the into-<c lerant principle of persecuting all who “ believe otherwise than she has been “ taught to believe: and would you, by “ the influence of your own example, ren-<c der her the inheritress of her forefathers’ £< illiberal prejudices? Oh, no! rather

54

THE NOVICE OF

“ teach her, that true virtue and true reli-“ gion are confined to no sect, to no party, to no country, and to no age; that, like “the dew of heaven, their influence is “ universal and impartial, and when un-cc opposed by prejudices, their vital prin-£t ciples are to be equally found in the heart “ of the Catholic and the Protestant, the “ Jew and the Mussulman, the Christian tf divine and the Indian bramin. But I have insensibly wandered from the point “ of discussion. Here,” again taking up the letter, u here is a list of the mostemi-“ nent of the Leaguers, who have made <c their formal submission to his majesty. Cc My dear friend, dare I hope that you “ will add your name to those of the illus-“ trious converts?”

The count de St. Dorval arose in great emotion. “Chevalier,” he exclaimed, “ I <£ reverence your noble and philanthropic “ sentiments, I adore your virtues, and I “ esteem your friendship beyond every 66 other possession of life, save the aflfee-

ST. DOMINICK.

55

“ tion of this child ; but we must drop “ for ever the discussion of a subject on “ which (however strong our sympathy on “ every other) we can never agree. I am “ too old and too indifferent to the opi-“ nion of the world to change those.senti-“ ments almost interwoven with my exist-“ ence. I have no ambition to satisfy, and c< therefore no inducement to stoop to si-“ mulation. Your friendship and my “ child’s aiTection are now the sole objects “ for which I shall live. Short, indeed, “ may be the term; let me enjoy it in “ peace.”

Then, taking the offered arm of Imogen, he slowly crept to his own room, and, throwing himself on the couch, expressed a wish to sleep, and desired Imogen to leave him. Those sentiments (sentiments so congenial to her own) which the chevalier had uttered with an energy that gave them a superadded force, discovered to Imogen the strong sympathy which existed between herself and the

THE NOVICE OF

amiable de SorviJle. Flattered by the coincidence, touched by the tender anxiety with which his friendship endeavoured to promote her father's interest, and actuated by that secret ambition of eminence which never slumbered in her mind, and which induced her to rescue her character from that infantine simplicity the chevalier appeared to attach to it, while her feelings and sentiments were still glowing* with the ardor illumined by his, she hurried back to the parlour, and, for the first time divested of that timidity the chevalier’s presence inspired, advanced towards him, and, placing both her hands in his, with peculiar grace and energy she said : “ Suffer my heart to offer you its grateful ff thanks for the active benevolence with “ which you have exerted yourself in fa-“ vour of its dearest object ; while the ho-“ nour you have conferred on me by sup-u posing I possess a mind capable of nourishing those divine sentiments by which, C( from your lips, I have been so pro-

ST. DOMINICK.

57

(C foundly edified, shall act as an incessant “ stimulus to render myself worthy of your “esteem. Yes, sir; (hough nurtured in “ the bosom of superstition, though early “ associated with the votarists of party, “ their example has produced an effect ff diametrically opposite to their tenets. c< I took nature and reason as my guide, iC and by their aid I recovered those just “ simple truths, which form the only basis “ of our religious and moral life, but “ which the dazzling allurements of error and superstition had nearly lost to me " for ever.”

The chevalier gazed for a moment on Imogen with delighted amazement : then,

o	o	y

pressing the hands he still held to his lips, he exclaimed: “ Wondrous being! who unitest the gay simplicity of childhood “ to the profound reflection of wisdom “ and maturity. Go on in the glorious lf path thou hast entered ; it will finally “ lead thee to consummate excellence in “ this life, and to bliss eternal in that c 2

THE NOVICE OF

“ which is to come. Disseminate what ic you feel, and exert thy influence with “ thy father in the cause of toleration and “philanthropy. Thy infatuating eloquence te may prevail where the home-spun argu-meats of friendship have failed. O my sweet friend !” he continued, drawing a chair towards Imogen, and seating himself by her,	when bigotry either in poli-

“ tics or religion invests the bosom of vice Ci or ignorance, we scarcely feel a regret <c at their dreadful effects, and we are sa-<f tisfied that the crime becomes the pu-<f nishment of the aggressors ; but when we see it tearing the hearts, inflaming <<r the passions, and destroying the peace, “ of the great, the good, the virtuous, then c; our hearts weep blood, and we sigh over <f the frailty of human nature even in its c‘ most perfect state. Alas ! how strongly |C is this illustrated in the noble families of St. Dorval and de Montargis ! and par-tf ticuiarly in the characters of your father ‘f and the'younger de Montargis, the one

ST. DOMINICK.

59

“ a protestant, the other a catholic ; both “ attached to different parties, both se-ie vered by hereditary hatred, both con-<s stantly opposed on the lists of variance ct and dissension, yet both equally pos-“ sessing every virtue that can adorn and “ exalt human nature; brave, wise, gene-(e rous, liberal, and humane ; with minds “ enlightened, intelligent, and philanthro-€f pic; with hearts warm, benevolent, and sensible ; with tempers and dispositions iC harmonized in unison with every social ffjoy; secretly united by sympathy, puh-licly divided by prejudice. O my amia-C( ble friend ! did you but know the full “ worth of these two inestimable charac-“ ters, you would, like me, lament the fa-“ tal prejudices which divide them.” Imogen,almost breathless with emotion, averted her head to conceal its effects.

" What de Montargis now is your fa-“ ther once was,” continued the chevalier: “ the same youthful ardor, the “ same enthusiasm, the same glowing vir-

60

THE NOVICE OF

“ tues, and the same attractive graces, <c were St. Dorval’s. Nor was his con-ct temporary and personal enemy (the el-Ci der de Montargis) destitute of virtues : ce but your father injured him in a tender <e point, and disappointed love has breath-“ ed a deathless spirit over hereditary dis-“ cord.” Then, after a pause, the chevalier raised his eyes to Imogen’s face, and added : “ The letter I have received was “ from your amiable conqueror of Laon. ce He writes as though he were born for “ no other purpose ; the eloquence of sen-ct timent is peculiarly bis. But perhaps <f you would wish to judge for yourself,” presenting her the letter.

Imogen, trembling and agitated, while her colour changedsuccessively from white to red, impatiently took the letter, not knowing what she did.

“ Keep it. and read it at your leisure,” said the chevalier carelessly.

No,” returned Imogen, after the struggle of a moment, returning the letter.

ST. DOMINICK.

61

“ I have no wish, no curiosity. But he is ff well, I hope?”

“ He makes no mention of his health/* said the chevalier, nor has he had the <f gallantry to make any inquiry for his Cl fair captive. However,you will forgive “ this omission when I tell you he seems " anxiously interested for your father’s re-“ covery.”

“Oh!” said Imogen, recovering herself, <f he does me the justice to believe “ that my health and happiness are wrapt “ up in my father’s, and that to inquire “ for either is to enquire for both. Where “ is the baron now, sir ?”

“ At Paris.”

“ Is he,” inarticulately demanded Imogen after a long pause, “ is he yet inar-“ ried?”

“ Then he informed you of his matri-“ monial engagements ?” asked the chevalier in some surprise.

“ Yes,” faintly replied Imogen, shocked at the imprudence she had been hurried into.

62

THE NOVICE OF

<c No, he is not yet married, but it is “ probable be soon will. The nature of Ins “ connection with mademoiselle de V—— c< is all a romance. She fell in love with cl his picture accidently seen, and his “ character accidentally learnt. She deli-“ vered him from prison ; and with more ff candour than prudence, or perhaps than delicacy, blazoned the excess of her cf romantic passion every where, and soon “ made her tenderness the topic of fashion-ff able discussion, and the subject of satiri-(l cal wit. The king himself at last took ct an interest in it, and proposed a match cc to the two fathers, who mutually con-£‘ sented to the union of their children ; fr and it is natural to suppose, that, if the “ young baron did not return the love of <r his mistress with equal enthusiasm, a heart so generous, so sensible, as his “ was deeply touched with the faithful af-'f fection and ardent tenderness of a young tc and lovely woman, who had not the art “ to conceal the love he had unconsciously “ inspired

ST. DOMINIGK.

63

“ Is she lovely?” demanded Imogen, eagerly.

“ The world thinks her so : and having “ been brought up without restraint and in €< great retirement, she has much youthful “ vivacity and naivete in her character.”

Imogen dared not ask more. She arose with affected composure, and, collecting some flowers she had lately gathered in a basket, said she would go and arrange them in her father's room, and left the parlour; while the chevalier, pursuing her with his penetrating glance, did not attempt to detain her. From the period in which this conversation took place, the intercourse between Imogen and the chevalier de Sorville wore a new aspect ; her insinuating familiarity and tender confidence increasing in proportion as his habitual gravity and reserve wore away, and his naturally mild and gentle character unfolded its amiable but unobtrusive qualities; delighted to observe that bis presence no longer imposed restraint or awakened

64

THE NOVICE OF

shyness. When they were alone, he indulged his melancholy by speaking of his departed friend, his unfortunate mistress; and by dwelling on that awful touching moment when, in all the sympathy of friendship, they first met in the cloisters of St. Dominick. In the presence of the count, their conversation was of a less touching and more general nature ; and he endeavoured to steal forth with kind artifices those native powers of Imogen’s strong and cultivated mind, which modesty and habitual bashfulness concealed. Sometimes, by affected ignorance or well-feigned curiosity, by supporting an erroneous argument or starting a false hypothesis, he drew forth those shining talents, that clear comprehensive faculty of reflection, which traces error to its source by the light of simple unsophisticated reason ; and sometimes, by falling into the discussion of a refined and touching sentiment, awakened that tender, persuasive, energetic, eloquence which flows from the sensible

ST. DOMINICK.

65

heart, the refined and elegant taste ; but if the chevalier frequently shrouded with one hand his own intellectual treasures, while with the other he drew aside the veil which modesty filing over genius, yet sometimes he burst upon his lively companion in all the radiance of native ability, refined and exalted by the most extensive and universal information, by the most intimate knowledge of all most precious in art or science, and crowned with a thorough and practical acquaintance with men and manners. Imogen, lost in delighted amazement, felt an hourly increase of admiration and esteem for her new friend; while the count de St. Dorval, at once gratifying the pride of a father and a friend, and indulging the indolence of an invalid, rather listened to than participated in their conversation ; and, while in the parental vanity of his heart he triumphed in the genius and talents of his daughter, he beheld with secret delight the increasing affection and esteem of twoob-

G6

THE NOTICE OF

jects so deservedly dear to him, and who, in the pursuit of virtue, truth, and knowledge, so strongly recommended each-other.

As soon as the count was able to write, he dispatched a courier to the abbess of St. Dominick, with a packet inclosing a large sum, to be laid out in any manner the abbess should direct for the benefit of

%

the convent, as an acknowledgement for the care taken of his daughter in her infant years, and accompanied by a letter of thanks, including a particular request that the holy mother would give every information respecting the date of the year and month, together with every circumstance attending the reception of his daughter at the convent of St. Dominick. The count wrote also a letter of thanks to the lady Magdelaine, accompanied by another from his daughter; and Imogen, whose affectionate heart overflowed with tenderness for all with whom she had been associated in early life, and whose liberal

ST. DOMINICK.

6 7

and generous nature eagerly sought opportunity of making participators in her good fortune, sent a sum of money to Am-brose, the old maitre-d’hotel, to be divided among the domestics of the chateau ; a letter full of grateful acknowledgements., and enclosing a munificent present to the page, a diamond cross to the lady abbess, with some less valuable but tastefully-chosen gifts for the nuns, to many of whom she was warmly attached. In three days the courier returned, bringing back with him the packets directed for the chateau de Montmorell, it being then only occupied by a peasant and his wife, who took care of it ; from whom he learnt that, the civil wars having been carried almost to its portals, it had been twice attacked by either party, and the lady Magdelaine and her family had been at last obliged to abandon it : and that she was then in Holland with her father-director, publishing her works. From the abbess they received a formal letter of congratulation, with an

ST. DOMINICK.

69

CHAP. XXI.

Rich was his mind in ev’ry art divine;

And thro’ the paths of science had he walk’d,

The votary of wisdom.

Glover’s Leonidas.

Sa nature libre et pardie Irréguliers dans ses attraits,

S’accord avec ma fantaisie.

Voltaire.

THE wounds of the count de St. Dor-val no longer required surgical attendance, but his long-undermined and delicate constitution had received a shock that almost baffled medical skill. Though weak, nervous, and debilitated, his rest and appetite gone, his form reduced to an anatomy, his spirit still seemed to survive the wreck of his frame, and his mind to triumph over corporeal infirmity. He now began to express an impatience to set out for the chateau de St. Dorval, as he believed himself able to travel by easy stages; but his physician having hinted that the mild and

70

THE NOVICE OF

general air of Italy might be more efficacious than that of France,, he testified the liveliest emotion of pleasure at the opinion, declared that it was in Italy alone he had ever truly lived, and that he then found himself perfectly able to undertake the journey, as even the hope of once more visiting that beloved country gave a healthful throb to his languid pulse. When he talked the matter over with Imogen and the chevalier, the latter said that the air of Calabria was in high estimation for its purity and mildness, and that he had a friend who possessed a house there which lie could command.

“ Do you then/* said the count with a melancholy smile, shrink from per-forming the rites of hospitality ? I thought “ you would have offered your friend a “ corner in that sweet retreat that once “ was to him the temple of love and bliss, cc the sweetest spot that nature ever adorn-“ ed since she imparadised the first created “ pair in Eden.”

/

ST. DOMINICK.	?	1

cc My dear friend,” said the chevalier, in a toneful of tender remonstrance, “ you <e know my heart ; there you live a never-“ absent guest; and it is for your sake, “ for your’s only, that I do not press an

“ invitation which------”

“ I understand you, chevalier/* interrupted the count : “ you tremble for the weakness of your friend. Alas ! well €C may you tremble ; for often, too often, “ have you experienced its effects; but if “ there be a luxury in woe, suffer me to taste the former, who have so long felt <f the latter only : suffer me once more “ to visit a spot where lived and where “ expired all my joys, where every object “ will bring remembrance to my soul, and “ cheer my drooping heart with memory's te lovely visions, where alone 1 enjoyed ‘f life, where alone 1 shall meet death with ce composure.”

<c Oh talk not of death, my father!" exclaimed Imogen tenderly, and falling on her father’s neck; “ long, long shall you

THE NOVICE OF

fC live to bless your child, and comfort her " for the loss of every other tie. I have “ but you, but you in the whole world!0 she added in an affecting tone, and bathing the cheek she kissed with her tears. The count pressed her in silent but profound emotion to his heart ; while the chevalier, deeply affected, encircled them both with his arms, and with affectionate energy exclaimed :	Long, long may you both

c< live, a blessing and a comfort to each

other !”

After a few intellectual struggles with the intentions of the count, Imogen and de Sorville desisted from their endeavours, convinced that opposition irritated without dissuading ; and the day being fixed for their departure for Italy, the chevalier set out for the chateau de Rosemont, to take leave of his sister, and to induce her to follow him to Tuscany, when an illustrious English family, then on a visit with her, should return to their native country. The chevalier was three days absent, and on

ST. DOMINICK.

73

the morning of their departure arrived. An amnt-courier preceded them by a day to prepare accommodation on the road. Imogen accompanied her father in a traveling carriage, the chevalier rode, and four domestics followed on horseback. The route they had planned out was, to proceed by a direct road to Lyons, there to embark on the Rhone, and coast along its delightful shores to Marseilles, where they meant to hire a felucca, and embark on the Genoese gulph for Tuscany. The mind of Imogen had long owed a homage to Italy, and her ardent fancy would have reveled in the anticipated delights of a journey so pregnant with interest, or a residence in a country whicli held so conspicuous a place in the history of the world, and where art and science (after a long bondage imposed by Gothic ignorance and Gothic barbarity) again revived their drooping heads, had not the feelings of her heart opposed themselves to the propensities of her taste ; for France still con-vol. hi,	d

74	THE NOVICE OF

tained that heart’s dearest object ; and still enamoured though hopeless, faithful though desponding, her affection for the baron de Montargis was an ever-existing principle of the soul, whose vital power was unextinguished, even when its active influence suffered a temporary suspension ; and to breathe the same air which he inhaled, to live in the same country which was his residence, was a tender and melancholy indulgence she could not resign without the most refined and profound regret. Hope in love, however opposed by certainty, never expires but with the passion itself. A thousand times Imogen said : “ Of what importance to me is the “ distance which shall divide us ? Though “ seas shall roll between us and motin-“ tains intervene, shall I not be as near “ him as now that we inhabit the same “country? It is fate, not distance, that “ divides us for ever! ’ Yet still some lingering and undefined expectation fluttered at her heart, and fondly warded off the intrusion of despair.

ST. DOMINICK.

75

Their journey to Lyons was performed by the count with more strength and spirit than was expected. The susceptible spirits of Imogen, exhilarated by air and exercise, by a variety of scenes and objects that met her delighted glance, gradually regained their lively tone : and her mind, raised by novelty or interested through the medium of her taste, poured forth its sensations in the eloquent language of nature. Every village was an object of interest that awakened a thousand naif observations, every picturesque view or romantic scene an objectof admiration which raised the dormant faculties of the poet and the painter, and her animated and just remarks were a perpetual source of amusement to her father and his friend.

Every thing is delightful to her,” said the chevalier to the count, as Imogen, who had left the carriage to ascend a hill, bounded lightly on ; “ every thing is de-te lightful to her, to whom every thing is “ new ; her life is now in its golden era

THE NOVICE OF

" when hope is unalloyed by doubt, and " pleasure is unsubdued by experience. “ Simple and unsophisticated, she enjoys “ the present without satiety, and feels €i that she is happier than she knows: "alas! that in becoming more wise she “ should become less happy !”

Early in the evening of their second day’s journey, they arrived at Lyons, and the count, too wToak to accompany his daughter, gave her in care to the chevalier, with whom she visited all that was most worthy of observation in that ancient and magnificent city. Wrapt in a transparent veil, leaning on the chevalier’s arm, Imogen traversed Lyons with new sensations of curiosity and pleasure. Reared in the solitary wilds of monastic seclusion, accustomed only to behold scattered hamlets or simple villages, the extent, grandeur, and population, of the first great city she had ever beheld made a strong impression on her mind. Over the superb ruins of the amphitheatre, which still preserved so fine a specimen of the taste and magnifi-

ST. DOMINICK.

77

cence of the Romans,, she loitered with classic fondness ; and while with a different interest 9he viewed the cathedral, whose gothic structure formed so striking a contrast to the noble edifice of remoter but more polished antiquity, she looked at the light and elegant modern palaces of the Lyonese nobles, which held a medium between either, with pleasure and surprise. They remained two days at Lyons, where they provided themselves with necessaries for their future journey ; and Imogen, seduced by the brilliant merchandize which the shops displayed, made some elegant additions to her wardrobe, with a pleasure natural to a young and gay mind : while her father, delighted only through the medium of those objects from which she derived pleasure, entered warmly into her innocent vanities, as she spread her finery before him, and amply supplied her with the means of their gratification.

A vessel having been previously hired

78

THE NOVICE OF

by their avant-courier, the count and his family, on the morning of the third day, embarked on the expansive bosom of the Rhone. The dawn was breaking in the east as they put off from the banks, and a favouring breeze soon wafted their light bark from the shore. Already the city of Lyons seemed to retreat from their gaze, and formed a grand perspective view, as its edifices, pointing to the rising sun, reflected back hi* strengthening beams; and a range of lofty mountain*, still involved in the mists of twilight, formed a bold bas relievo to the brilliant fore-ground. As they coasted along the eastern banks of the Rhone, the chill sighs of the bize rendered the air sharp and biting ; and the gloom of a grey and sombrous morning, with the bleak wildness of the surrounding scenery, shed a pensive influence over the too susceptible minds of St. Dorval and his daughter. Imogen, no longer amused by novelty, or fascinated by variety, reverted with tenderness and regret

ST. DOMINICK.

79

to the object of her heart’s long habitual contemplation ; or, observing her father’s melancholy, clasped his hand in hers, as she sat by him on the deck, and raised her eyes to his with looks of tenderness and solicitude.

The chevalier, who had thrown himself along a bench with a book in his hand, yet still observant of his companions, perceived their pensive reveries, and, anxious to chase the shadow of melancholy from their minds, approached to cheer and engage them with his conversation. Imogen asked him, as he advanced, if the air was not too sharp for her father to remain on deck? The count said he felt it rather invigorating than chill; and the chevalier replied :

Do you know, my little friend, that ‘f this bize, of whose sharpness yon com-

plain, was esteemed so salubrious and “ healthful in its effects by the ancients, “ that the emperor Augustus erected an <f altar to it?”

80

THE NOVICE OF

tf And where I pay it any homage,” said Imogen smiling, “ it is such as we are “ told the Indians pay to the infernal deity, the adoration of fear, not of love ; to avert its wrath, not to conciliate its favour. And yet I would rather en-counter its effects than resign the plea-fe sures this prospect affords, though rather wildly than luxuriantly picturesque.” ff It is indeed wild,” said the chevalier, “ but, as we advance southward, the land-“ scape will glow with richer beauty to the “eye. Yet even this scene is not desti-“ tute of interest : look to the right, you have the Viverais Mountains covered with eternal snows ; on the left those ff of Dauphiné, which lose their immense heights amidst the more stupendous <e summits of the cloud-embosomed Alps.’* The chevalier then entered on the natural history of the country through which they passed with the combined intelligence of a botanist, a mineralogist, an historian, and a poet; and in a variety of interesting,

ST. DOMINICK.

SI

instructive, and elegant, conversation passed away the rest of the day. Two hours before sun-set they arrived at Romans, where they landed and supped, and retired early to rest. As this town had nothing to recommend it but its antiquity, and the count felt himself so sufficiently strong to proceed the next morning, after Imogen had rambled about the town for an hour with her amiable cicerone, they again embarked on the Rhone. It was such a morning as brings with it a new sense of existence ; the air, fresh and fragrant, though glowing, without inspiring indolent softness, or animating to wild hilarity, breathed a grateful languor, and, promoting the flow of animal spirits, increased the heart’s light throb, and plunged the mind in those delicious reveries whose ideal pleasures so sweetly compensate for the loss of real joys. While the count and chevalier conversed on indifferent topics, Imogen drew forth her pencil* d 2

THE NOVICE OF

82

and realized a poetical effusion to the

FIRST HOUR OF MORNING.

When she had finished the last lines she raised her eyes, and beheld those of her father and kis friend earnestly fixed on her. Confused and blushing, she attempted to conceal her tablet, but the chevalier, playfully snatching it out of her hand, read her little poetical address aloud, and Imogen soon found she had no severe criticism to apprehend from judges so partially inclined to approve. Oppressed by their eulogiums, she endeavoured to give another turn to the conversation, and inquired the names of those mountains whose chain extended along the western banks of the Rhone.

Cf They are a ramification of the Pyre-<f nees,” replied the chevalier, f‘ which

stretch across the provinces of Rousillon, “ Languedoc, and Auvergne; and those “ which swell on the east are a branch of tfc the Alps, which extend through the dis-tf tricts of Provence and Dauphiné ; the

ST. DOM fNICK.

83

“ mountains of Auvergne, now so reinote-“ ly seen, and which appear like clouds ff floating in the atmosphere, are curious <r and romantic beyond description, and equally interesting to the naturalist, the ff antiquarian, the painter, and the histo-ff rian ; many of them are volcanic, and f*' composed of immense rocks of'basaltes, “ pazzolani, and lava, but fertile in pas-ft turage and clothed with woods; while perched in the most romantic situations fc are to be seen castles and villages after r‘ the ancient Gallic manner, some of which it is suppoed have existed from <f ages orior to the arrival of Julius

O	*

Cæsar.”

Imogen, whose thirst of information was insatiate, persevered in those questions which were always so fully and ably answered. As they continued their voyage down the Rhone, which now fertilized the delicious plains of Provence—plains that always held so deep an interest in the heart of Imogen, while their light bark

THE NOVICE OF

glided amidst umbrageous islands, rich in olive and chesnut plantations, or along those banks strewed with rural villages and luxuriant vineyards, she transportedly exclaimed, “ This then is Provence. De-“ lightful country ! no wonder the Greeks “ abandoned their own natal plains, all-“ charming as they were, to become pos-sessed of your’s.”

<f Nor that the Arabs quitted their u Iberia,” said the chevalier, “ for the de-“ licious vales of Languedoc, which now “ begin to spread to the left. And look, I “ prithee, what a charming effect the sun-“ tinged spires of the ancient city of “ Montelemarl, and the grotesque turrets “ of St. Paul, which lie more southward, produce.”

The count, whose impatience to arrive in Italy increased in proportion as he advanced towards it, refused to land at Avignon, lest Imogen or the chevalier should tempt him to visit the chateau de St. Dor-val, which lay within a few leagues of that

ST. DOMINICK.

85

city, and thereby retard his journey. As the day was uncommonly mild and beautiful, they took their evening repast on board, and continued their interesting voyage by moon-light. The count, wrapt in a large cloke, silent and abstracted, seemed wholly resigned to pensive reverie; the chevalier was lost in profound reflection ; and while the unruffled bosom of the Rhone sparkled to the glancing moonbeam, or reflected in its glassy surface the softened shade of each surrounding object, the treasured visions of memory played lightly over the tender heart of Imogen, and love, deprived of future hope, reveled in the recollection of its expired joys.— The clock of a neighbouring convent struck twelve as their vessel anchored beneath the ramparts of the ancient castle of Tarascon, where they meant to rest for the night. The count gazed on this fine old structure with emotion, then cast a glance on the opposite shores, where the corresponding fortress of Beaucaire, noble in its ruins, hung over a craggy cliff.

S 6

THE NOVICE OF

€t It is thus/’ said lie to the chevalier, with a profound sigh, “ it is thus, in after-“ ages, the traveller shall gaze with intc-“ rest and curiosity on the ruins of the chateau de Montargis and de St. Dor-val, when their present possessors, with “ all their animosities, shall moulder in the dust.” Imogen echoed her father’s sigh, and they all gazed with melancholy interest on the remains of former strength and grandeur.

“ Such is the humiliating lot of man,” said the chevalier, “to be survived by the cs works of his hand ! but life holds no il jurisdiction over virtue and genius ; the cC memory of succeeding ages treasures “ their acts, and their inheritance is im-“ mortality

When they landed, the count, who felt himself less convalescent than he had been since he had left the village of Nivermont, retired instantly to the apartment prepared for him; and Imogen, whose spirits were touched with pensive languor, followed his

ST. DOMINICK.

87

example, and passed a sleepless night in thinking on him with whom every joy and every sorrow, every idea and every hope, was still connected. A thousand times in the course of their picturesque voyage the recollection of the baron de Montargis, his refined taste, his ardent feelings, and extensive intelligence, shot athwart her mind ; those scenes he had first pointed out to her view from the terrace of Mont-moreil still appeared to her fancy, and his glowing language, grateful gestures, impassioned air, and enthusiastic manner, seemed to form a striking contrast to the not less intelligent, though, to her, less attractive conversation of the grave and gentle chevalier de Sorville. “ Alas !” she would mentally exclaim, as her enraptured eye dwelt on the beauties of the varying scene, “ it is for thy pure and sublime ff taste, amiable de Montargis, it is for the <f enthusiastic ardor of thy bosom to feel “ the emotions these enchanting scenes are C{ calculated to awaken.”

88

THE NOVICE OF

The following morning the count felt himself so indisposed, that the chevalier and Imogen, though with some difficulty, prevailed on him to remain for that day at Tarascon. While they were at breakfast the chevalier mentioned the ruins of Marius’s trophies, erected in honour of his triumphs over the Cimbri, which lay within a short distance of the town, and Imogen eagerly proposed to walk to it in the evening. After an early dinner, therefore, she accepted the chevalier’s arm, and they set out on their little pedestrian journey. After having loitered over this monument of Roman magnificence erected to the honour of Roman heroism, Imogen with some reluctance turned from its contemplation. As they proceeded to Tarascon, the mild radiance of an evening sun shone on their path, and threw a rich glow on every object; innumerable groupes of Provençal peasantry laden with their rural instruments, returning from their labour in the vineyard or olivet, constantly saluted then*

ST. DOMINICK.

S9

as they passed : while others, already arrived at their happy homes, danced with grace and spirit before their cottage-doors to the sound of the viol and tabor. Imogen, almost tempted to join their courantes and farandoles, stopped to observe them with a pleasure inferior only to what they seemed to feel themselves ; and the fire and animation which so eminently distinguished the Provençal countenance danced in her eyes, and awakened her happiest smiles.

“ When you come to reside in this country/' said the chevalier, earnestly observing her, “ I shall expect to see “ you a second Clemence d’Isaure, revi-ving the spirit of ancient poesy and song, and distributing the golden violet with “ your own fair hands to the triumphant minstrels.”

I must first become mistress of the <( language/’ said Imogen laughing, be-“ fore I can judge of its poetical beauties ; “ at present it is almost unintelligible to

THE NOVICE OF

" me,” While a deep blush suffused her cheek, at the recollection the name of Clemence d’Isaure, and the mention of the golden violet, awakened.

I assure you it would repay the trou-rf ble of studying it,” said the chevalier; t( for, besides that it is so famous in an-“ cicnt romance, it is by no mean» defi* “ cient in beauty and expression. It was " formerly called La Langue tortue, and (< is the remains of the ancient language “ of the Narhonenses, derived from the an-“ cient Gauls, and mixed with the Greek from the Greek colony of ^Marseilles, rc the inhabitants of which to this day re-“ tain many Grecian terms and customs de-“ rived from their Heleneslic ancestors/’ As they walked on, Imogen caught the sound of an old ballad she had learnt at Montmorell from the old femme de charge of the lady Magdelaine’3 household, and sung in a voice familiar to her ear: she started, looked round, and observed a female seated beneath a tree at a cottage

ST. DOMINICK.

91

door,, whose back was turned towards them, and who was busily occupied at her reek Imogen, in great perturbation, advanced ; the female turned round, and Imogen, to her utter amazement, beheld Beatrice, the chief embroidress to the lady Magdelaitie, who, with a wild shriek of joyous surprise, dashed her reel to the earth, and threw herself into Imogen's arms. While the chevalier beheld this strange scene in silent amazement, Imogen and her old friend exchanged exclamations of pleasure and amazement at this extraordinary and unexpected rencontre. The warm and affectionate heart of Imogen throbbed with tender satisfaction at beholding this young woman, who had been the companion of her early years at Montmorell ; and in whom, as the humble novice of St. Dominick, she had inspired as much respect as she could now do as the acknowledged daughter of St. Dorval : while Beatrice, who loved and hated with all the unmodified ardor of a Provencal,

02

THE NOVICE OP

testified the most extravagant delight in beholding Imogen.

“ Mother of God !” exclaimed Beatrice, kissing Imogen’s hand as the first flush of emotion subsided, ff who would have “ thought to have met dear mademoiselle “ in Provence, and married too, I warrant, “ to that noble cavalier curtesying low to the chevalier. “ Holy mass ! what a “ handsome dress too! The lady Magde-“ laine gave forty livres a yard to Zacha-“ riah Mendoza, the old Jew pedlar, for fr lace not half so handsome as the trim-“ ming of that veil. Well, so help mehea-“ ven, if the very night before you left the chateau 1 had not a dream that foretold all this ! Well, this it was I

“ dreamed-----”

“ But, my good Béatrice,” interrupted Imogen, who knew by experience her talent of dreaming, what extraordinary “ circumstance has led you this distance <( from the chateau de Montmorell ?”

“ Dear lady, you shall know all, every

ST. DOMINICK.

93

" syllable, if you would only condescend to “ enter this little hut, and monsieur will “ also do me the honour.’*

Imogen and the chevalier accepted the invitation ; and Beatrice, after apologizing for the disorder of the cottage, which she attempted to arrange, presented seats, and leaning over the clumsy back of Imogen’s chair, exclaimed : “ Why, lady, St. Domi-“ nick himself could not have supported “ it any longer? and to confess the truth, “ some folk thought that the saint had a “ hand in your elopement; and the ladies “ of the convent, who always looked on ts you as one of the elect, did not seem to “ deny it. A strange work indeed it made lt through the neighbourhood : lady Mag-({ delaine stormed, the friar shook his head “ and crossed himself, the servants marvel-“ led, the poor wept, and I thought I should fi have died, for I was morally certain you “ had fallen into the great pond in the mulberry-grove, were you used to sit t* £nd read under the shade of a tree, for

94

THE NOVICE OF

“ strange sounds were heard about it iC every night. Well, this was not all, " for Theodore eloped Iwo days after ; my “ lady’s pet owl died ; my own macaw “ broke his wing ; and Bernardine, the Ci only man in the family who could dance i( a courante, was caught with the leg of a capon is in hand by the father con-fessor on the vigil of St. Francis, and “ so was discharged. No ! flesh and blood c< could not stand the chateau after this ; ec and so hearing the old gardener of the tf convent, who, you know, lady, was my ff grand-uncle by the mother’s side, and “ who brought me up from a child, and C( placed me with the lady Magdelaine, ff was returning to Provence, his native country, I prayed him to suffer me to cf return also with him and keep house ff for him; and so he complied, and pur-chased this little cottage as soon as we' rc arrived at Tarascon; but, what with the “ length of the journey, and finding all çi his old friends and acquaintances dead,

ST. DOMINICK.

95

“ and a violent fit of the gout, he died about a week ago, poor dear old man.” Here Beatrice burst into tears, and hid her face in her hands.

“ And in what circumstances has he “ left thee, my poor Beatrice ?” said lmo-gen soothingly.

“ Holy rosary ! mademoiselle, in no cir-ie cumstances at all : what money he pos-a sessed he laid out in this little cottage “ and yonder olivet, which he meant to “ cultivate ; but, while the priest was say-“ ing mass over him, in comes his nephew, “ and claims all his property, and leaves me little better than a beggar, bating {t what I saved in the lady Magdelaine’s u service, and what with Jew pedlars, “ astrologers, and gipseys, that was but “ little; however, I intend to go to Ta-il rascon to-morrow, and offer iny ser-V vices to a widow who works tapestry, £c for my cousin threatens every day to turn “ me out.”

“ Then, if you would not prefer the

96

THE NOVICE OF

“ service of this widow to mine/* said Imogen eagerly, frcome with me. I have u only time to tell you now, that I have “ found a father, with inclination and ability to gratify every wish of my heart. ct We are now on our way to Italy, whi-“ ther my father, the count de St. Dorval, (i is going for the recovery of his health (i with this gentleman ; and, if you have £‘ no objection to leave your native country, “ you shall accompany me.”

“ Mother of God ! objection ! I go to Italy ! and with you, dear mademoiselle, a who are a count’s daughter!” While the tears still stood in the eyes of Beatrice for her old uncle’s loss, she burst into a fit of laughter, expressive of the wildest emotion of joy and amazement. Then, seizing Imogen’s hand, which she kissed a thousand times, she added : “ Go to Italy !

aye, dear lady, only let me be your ser-Cf vaut, and I will follow you all the world “ over.”

“ We are now at Tarascon,” said Imo-

ST. DOMINICK.

97

gen ; '" but if my father does not find “ himself worse, we shall leave it to-mor-“ row morning for Arles; if, therefore, f( you can be with us by that time, Bea-“ trice—”

“ Lady, I can go with you this mo-Ct ment, if you please/’eagerly interrupted Beatrice ; " my cousin will be marvellous “ happy to find me out of the way when " he returns. Christ, how I talk ! Certes tc this dress would never do for traveling. "No; with your good pleasure, I will " just step in and .put on my tawny-" orange camblet petticoat and vest, and “ my grey velvet hood with the bugle “ trimming. You may remember it, lady. “ My lady Magdelaine wore it till it was * a shame to see it ; but I have done it up so, it looks like new. But then, tc good saints! what am I to do with the ce rest of my clothes, and my new cedar “ box lined with the miracles of the twelve

" apostles, and-----”

Imogen, whose sanguine and ardent

VOL. Ill,	£



9S	THE	NOVICE	OF

character assimilated in some degree to that of the naif Provencals, entered with interest into the eager impatience of Beatrice; and while the chevalier was highly amused with the mutual naïveté of the mistress and maid, she turned to him and said :

“ I am sure we shall not leave Taras-con till late in the day. Would it not “ be better to send out a servant and some f‘ mode of conveyance for this poor girl “ early to-morrow morning?*'

u Will you,” said the chevalier taking her hand, consider me as your agent in " this business? and leave it me?”

“ Oh) most willingly, most gratefully,” said Imogen, while Beatrice curtsied low her thanks.

When they returned to Tarascon they found the count much restored by a refreshing sleep; arid when Imogen informed him of her adventure and her engagement with Beatrice, he expressedtlhat pleasure which the gratification of his daugh-

ST. DOMINICK.

99

ter’s wishes always awakened. While they were at breakfast the next morning Beatrice arrived, and they embarked about noon for Arles, which they reached late in the evening. When Imogen retired for the night, Beatrice, entering on her of-cial station, presided at the ceremonies of the toilet. Anticipating the condescension of her mistress, she exclaimed as she unfolded her long and luxuriant tresses : ft You need not say a word, lady, about “ your extraordinary adventures since you “ left the chateau de Montmorell. I heard it all, every syllable, together with your “ wonderful meeting with my lord the count, your noble father, from monsieur " Francois, my lord’s chief laquais, as he “ conducted me toTarascon this morning, who heard it from the little page, who “ overheard it from your own lips in the ff camp when you were taken prisoner 'f there. Blessed saints! there is nothing “ like it in all the wondrous, amusing, and “ tragical tales I have ever read; not cx-

100

THE NOVICE OF

“ not excepting the curious device of the “ amorous shoemaker, who killed himself tfi with his own cutting-knife for love of a “ princess. Monsieur Francois says that “ you are the richest heiress in France, as “ was your mother before you, peace to “ the soul of the sweet lady, say I.” u But Theodore, you say, Beatrice, left “ the chateau two days after me ?” interrupted Imogen.

“ Aye, lady; and people, you know, ff will be talking, and they made some curious guesses; for every one knew, “ mademoiselle, the young page was once “ going to cut his throat for love of you, “ like the amorous shoemaker ; however, two days after his departure the old wood-cutter of the forest saw him with

ff a party of soldiers in the town of----;

“ and so then we found we were in the “ wrong, and that instead of going after tf you he had gone to the wars.”

When the heart is engrossed by a secret but forbidden object of contemplation.

ST. DOMINICK.

101

when all ils powers and all its feelings are possessed with those ideas, those sentiments, that object is calculated to awaken, it clings with fondness to every circumstance (however remotely) connected with it, and without immediately daring' to dwell on the subject of all its hidden cogitation, hovers round it with solicitous but timid fondness. It w’as thus with Imogen, who detained Beatrice in her room till a late hour, continued to dwell on the circumstance of her residence at the chateau de MonlmorelJj and mentioned several little occurrences which took place about the period of the minstrel's arrival there; fearful yet anxious to make him the subject of conversation to one who had seen and known him, and who neither suspected nor might have become acquainted with his real name and rank in life. But Beatrice, wholly engrosssd with herself, her former sufferings in the chateau de Montmorell, and her present elevation, • only once and slightly mentioned the min-

THE NOVICE OF

strel, with the certainty of his being a conjuror; and Imogen, weary of a garrulity which no longer fascinated her attention through the hope of interesting lier heart, at last dismissed her, sensible of the imprudence of her wishes, yet mortified at their disappointment.

Early the next morning they proceeded by land from Arles to Marseilles. As they approached that ancient and magnificent city, Imogen observed the tender melancholy which involved the air and manner of the chevalier, who rode beside their litter, and recollected that Marseilles was the birth-place of the unfortunate canoness of St. Dominick; and the count, in whom the sympathy of friendship never slumbered, endeavoured to draw off the attention of the chevalier from the sad subject of his thoughts, by speaking of the former and present state of Marseilles, of its colonization by the Phocaci, and the strong resemblance which still existed between the modern Marscillians and their Greek

ST. D0MIN3CK.

103

progenitors. The chevalier, whose quick apprehension instantly awakened to the solicitous attentions of his friend, with that power of mind which belongs to the truly wise, who are always under the influence of reason because they wish to be so, instantly shook off that unavailing melancholy which the weakness of inferior minds would cherish as the attractive offspring of sensibility, and replied to the count’s observation :

ff Your remark is perfectly just; the <f national spirit of the Marseillians is <f strongly imbued with the Grecian fire tl of their ancestors: the same ardency “ of imagination ; the same copiousness, “ warmth, and fluency, in speech; the ff same enthusiam, credulity, inconstancy, <{ and vivaciousness, which distinguished ** their Grecian forefathers, are to be found “ in their French descendants. It is also “ observable, that the Marseillians retain a ff line of feature which ascertains the tes-ff timony of history concerning their ori-

104

THE NOVICE OF

gin. Observe that groupe of peasantry tf reposing beneath the umbrage of that “ spreading tree—there is not a French tf face among them ; thus a distance of near " seven hundred years has not been able <f to efface those physiogiiomonical traces <f which distinguish the inhabitants of Gaul “ from their northern invaders, who set-i( tied themselves in some of our most luxuriant provinces in the reign of Charles <f the Gross; a circumstance which, to the “ mind of the all-inquiring philosopher, ‘f affords a curious and interesting subject “ of reflection.”

Imogen, after this observation, gazed with eager curiosity on every figure that saluted her eye. In every rural nymph, who flitted by them laden with herbs she had culled from the mountain’s brow, or the implements of the vineyard, she fancied she observed the soul-beaming countenance of a Sappho, or the elegant graces of an Aspasia ; and in every rustic who courteously saluted them as he passed, the

ST. DOMINICK.

105

air of a Pericles, or the head of au Alcibiades.

They arrived at Marseilles early in the evening, and while supper was preparing the chevalier proposed to Imogen to walk, who delightedly acceded. The chevalier directed her steps towards the harbour. Imogen, in whose mind nature had profusely sown those seeds from which the painter’s and the poet’s richest blossoms spring, contemplated in animated delight the picturesque scene this beautiful harbour afforded. Spreading its glassy bosom from the base of those lofty and surrounding mountains, in whose overhanging shade it appears to repose, exposed to the southern sun, and glittering to its rays, it formed a brilliant contrast to the dark massy colouring of the back-ground ; while in the delightful walk its ports afforded were to be seen an assemblage which amused the eye by its variety, charmed the imagination by its singularity, and interested the mind by the train of reflections it awakened.

e 2

106	THE NOVICE OF

“ Here,” said the chevalier, pointing to the various groupes of traders, Turks, Greeks, French, English, and Italians, all dressed in their respective national habits, “ here is not only a rich field for the “ painter who would delineate the boldest “ groupings in the most characteristic costume, but for the moralist and phi-“ losopher. This scene comprehends within its circle not only an epitome of “ nations, but of mankind. Self-interest “ is the governing principle which ac-“ tuâtes the aggregate, and lures the Mus-ic sulman and the Christian, the infidel and “ the Jew, the cold deliberate northern " and the sanguine inhabitant of the south, to the same point of attraction. “ Observe how the pale face of that wan-“ looking Englishman, the animated coun-“ tcnance of that Italian, the dull brow of “ that Dutchman, and the sombre visage 11 of that Turk, are all marked by the same “ predominant expression, under the dif-“ feront modifications which being a sue-

$T. DOMINICK.

107

u cessful or an unsuccessful dealer occasions ; while the appropriate scenery around them serves as a powerful stimu-ff lus to the exertions of interest. Wild, “ barren, and sterile, the opulence of com-nierce and the efforts of industry have “ counteracted the niggard intentions of “ nature, and, amidst unfruitful wilds and “ barren rocks, erected the sumptuous “ dwelling of mercantile prosperity in “ luxuriant gardens of artificial beauty and " forced fertility.”

Imogen, delighted though fatigued, returned in animated flow of spirits to her father, who listened to her lively and pointed details in all the fond triumph of a floating parental heart. Her naïveté, her charming and her original manners, her curious felicity of expression, and her elegant and refined taste, where fancy or imagination were called into action, gratified his pride as deeply as her modest, simple, and ingenuous, character awakened his affection and esteem. Had she

THE NOVICE O!'

not been his daughter, he had loved* esteemed, and admired, her; but as his child, as the child of his Julia, she was the object of his idolatry. At supper the count proposed remaining the following day at Marseilles, in order to afford Imogen the gratification of visiting every thing worthy of being seen, besides that he had himself some business to transact with a banker in the town. Imogen, delighted at the indulgence, kissed her father’s hand in token of her gratitude, and the chevalier offered himself as her Cicerone, and was thankfully accepted.

CHAP. XXII.

0 father Abraham, what these Christians be !

Shakespeare.

THE next morning, as they sat at breakfast, their host of the inn entered the apartment, and after a low preliminary bow he advanced to the count, and, drawing a ring from his pocket, presented it to

ST. DOMINICK.

109

him, saying :—“ I have made bold to take “ the liberty of requesting monseigneur’s ft opinion of that ring, being no great “ judge of such matters mv^elf, and having “ a lillle Romtthing at risk with respect i( to its value.”

The count took the ring, and, having looked at it, said: “ My good friend, I “ would advise you to consult a lapidary ; “ but, although I cannot appreciate the “ identical worth of the ring, I can assure tc you it appears to me to be a diamond “ of great value, and the amethysts which “ surround it are the most beautiful I ever “ beheld. What is your opinion, cheva-“ lier ?”

Imogen, looking at it as she took it in her hand, uttered an exclamation of astonishment.

“ What is the matter?” said the count and the chevalier in a breath.

“ That ring,” said Imogen in a hurried tone, “was mine, and given me by Rosalie “ de Vilette, the minor canoness of St. “ Dominick.”

THE NOVICE OF

*r God of heaven !” exclaimed the chevalier as he examined it, “ I remember it well ; it was her mother’s dying legacy; ff she wore it suspended round her neck, <f and here are the initials of her name, which 1 myself carved on it as she Cf shewed it me bathed with tears of filial “ regret. Even now that moment is pre-“ sent, for on that day I beheld her for “ the last time.”

The chevalier’s eyes were suffused with tears, and he pressed it to his lips ; while the count, all amazement, enquired from Imogen how she lost it. She related the circumstance of the soldier’s forcing it from her at the chateau le Noir, and he turned round and demanded from the host how it had come into his possession.

The man, all aghast, after a moment's hesitation, replied:	"Why,	if	mon-

“ seigneur will have the goodness to grant " me his patience, I will relate the whole " story. This then it is: a week come " to-morrow, about midnight, and just as

ST. DOMINICK.

Ill

«« I had attended some noble chevaliers to ,f their room, a stranger, mounted on a “ sorry mule enough, rode into our yard. “ He was wrapt in an old black cloke, and " by the light of the lamp looked deadly “ pale. He was scarcely able to speak, “ and with difficulty we understood from “ him that he had come to Marseilles to tc take shipping in a vesselbound for Spain, “ and that within three leagues of the “ city he had been attacked by a party of cc robbers, who had wounded and plun-“ dered him of almost all he possessed. “ Holy saints ! he was no pleasant guest, “ and at such an hour too; however, we ic assisted him to alight, carried him to “ bed, and sent for a surgeon, who from ,c the first had a very bad opinion of him. C( Just as he was beginning to get a little “ better, his wounds took a bad turn, and “ his life is now despaired of. As we have “ been at some trouble and no little ex-tc pence, and as every body should look “ to themselves, I brought him up my

112

THE NOVICE OF

“ bill this morning; and he gave me this “ ring, and said he wished to dispose of it, “ but I would riot venture the sum he “ asked until I had somebody's opinion “ who knew more of these matters than “ myself.”

“ Should we not see this person,” demanded the count of the chevalier, “and “ try to discover how this ring came into “ his possession ?”

“ Certainly,” said the chevalier; “ for, u independent of its intrinsic value, it tC must be inestimable to your daughter, “ as the gift of her dearest friend.”

“Inestimable indeed!” said Imogen, bathing the kiss she impressed on it with a tear; “and this unfortunate man, who is u perhaps a foreigner, without friends or “ money, may require our assistance. Let “ us visit him, dear sir; a little personal “ attention in such a situation- is more “ grateful to the heart of misery than all “ the proffered services in the world.” The count pressed the hand of his

ST. DOMINICK.

113

daughter, and the chevalier said, “ There “ is as much truth and sensibility in that c< assertion as benevolence and humanity.” Then, turning* to the landlord, he demanded if the stranger was confined to his bed. The man answered no, that the warmth of the weather had obliged him to leave it, and that he was then lying on a couch at an open casement.

“ Lead the way then,” said the count; “ a visit of kindness is never unseason-r< able.”

The host proceeded, followed by the count, Imogen, and the chevalier, to the apartment of the invalid. As they entered it they were met by a friar in the habit of St. Dominick, who was going out. The invalid was wrapt in a large cloke, stretched on a couch ; from his wrist hung a rosary, in his right hand he held a crucifix, over which he appeared to pray devoutly; his left supported his head.

“ Monsieur,” said the host as be approached, here is monseigneur the count

ÏHE NOVICE OF

de St. Dorval and the lady his daughter u corne to visit you.”

The invalid, raising his languid eyes to the face of St. Dorval, sank back on the couch, the cross dropped from his hands, and the palenesé of death covered his face. The count and chevalier, supposing it was the faintness of indisposition, endeavoured to raise him, and apologised for their intrusion by explaining the motives which influenced it; while Imogen, as she chafed his temples with some vivifying drops, looking earnestly in his face, suddenly exclaimed, <f ’Tis the soldier of chateau le <f Noir !”

(cMerciful God!” said the count, tfr it <f is Stephano !”

<( The confidential servant of your fa-u ther,” reiterated the chevalier, whom “ you received into your family on your marriage !”

The invalid, staring wildly round him, fixed his eyes on the count and chevalier alternately, then in a hurried and incoherent accent said ;

ST. DOMINICK.

115

" Yes, I am Stephano ; and you. I rc-iC member now, you are the count de St. u Dorval and the chevalier de Sorvillc.

“ It is a long’ long time since we met.”

The count buried his face in his hands ; his whole frame shook with emotion, for the last time he had beheld Stephano was following the remains of his wife. The Spaniard disappeared the following day, and had not afterwards been heard of. Imogen, who had drawn timidly back as she recognised the fierce and ghastly countenance of the arquebusier, on observing her father's agitation, came forward and took his hand ; while the invalid, who now for the first time got a perfect glimpse of her, with an exclamation of horror hid his face in his cloke.

ff Stephano," said the chevalier, seating himself beside the couch, “ what is it you c< seem to fear? You are among friends “ who wish to serve you.”

“ Tell me,” said the Spaniard, gazing fearfully on Imogen, “did I not see her

116

THE NOVICE OF

<f dead? did I not see her buried ? It was u for her child she died, I know ; yet why “ comes she to me ? It was I who saved “ her child from eternal perdition !”

The chevalier and the count, though they suspected the senses of Stcphano to be disordered, yet comprehended his allusion to the countess de St. Dorval, and perceived that the likeness between Imogen and her mother deceived him into the belief that it was the countess herself he beheld; while at the hint he dropped of having saved the child, the chevalier, looking expressly at the count, said, addressing the invalid, cf Look up, Stephano ; this <£ young lady is the only daughter of the “ count and the late countess de St. Dor-£« val. In what respect does she owe her “ eternal preservation to you ?”

Stephano, raising himself on his arm, and gazing in silent but evident amazement on Imogen, after a few minutes selfcollection, exclaimed : “ Yes, it must be so. How like her mother 1 Seventeen

ST. DOMINICK.

117

“ years back I bore her an infant in these arms, bore her from heresy and perdi-“ tion to eternal life, and placed her un-“ der the care of my patron saint—1 left " her in the wheel of the convent of St. ft Dominick.”

“ Merciful God !” exclaimed the count ; “ it was you then who carried away my “ child ! you caused her mother’s death!” “ I will answer no questions,” said the Spaniard coldly, “ until you first inform “ me when you discovered her to be your <f child, how long- she remained in the “ convent of St. Dominick, and what faith u she professes.”

<f I discovered her to be my child,” said the count, in some agitation, “ not two months back, by a strange coincidence tc of circumstances, by a cross she wore “ round her neck, and by the mark on “ her temple. She has lived in the con-“ vent of St. Dominick since she was placed there until that period, and she “ has been educated in the Roman Catho-“ He faith.”

118

THE NOVICE OF

“ Jesus be praised !” fervently exclaimed the Spaniard, raising his hands and eyes to heaven : cf in saving her soul from “ perdition, I have redeemed my own ; in “ snatching one being from the heresies of Satan, I have purchased my own sal-“ vation, and now I shall die in peace!" Then, faint and exhausted, he sank back on the couch.

The count, trembling with anxiety and emotion, and fearful lest the death of the gloomy bigot should frustrate his desire to know the secret mystery which hung over the long-lamented loss of his child, eagerly exclaimed :	Speak, Stephano ! in mercy

o to yourself and to me, if you expect to “ beforgiven the miseriesyou have caused, “ say by what means was I deprived of my child, and to what purpose ?”

“ I have no reason to conceal,” said the Spaniard, with renovated strength, (i what " I triumph in having effected.”

Then, after a moment’s pause, while the count, Imogen, and the chevalier, seated themselves round him, he continued :

ST. DOMINICK.»

119

cl When I entered your father’s service (t as his page, who brought me from Spain, you were my younger by five years ; yet ‘‘ you sometimes did me the honour to u make me the companion of your boyish “ sports. One day, as we played at quoits, “ I said something to displease you, and “ you struck me. I dared not return the (< blow, but I never forgot it. Shortly “ after my lords gentleman died. Isuc-ceeded to the situation, and became his “ confidant and friend as well as his ser-<c vant. When your marriage took place, “ I felt the sufferings of your father as if “ they were my own. ‘ Had he married a “ beggar,’ said the count to me, ‘ I had “ forgiven it; but a heretic, and a ward of “ the de Montargis's, Stephano, that I <c will never pardon !’ Some months after, u when we returned from Paris to the chateau de St. Dorval, the count one “ morning called me into his oratory. “ ' Stephano,’ said he, c my son is on the ic. point of becoming a father; bull will not

120

THE NOVICE OF

“ be tlie progenitor of a race of heretics. “ Madame St. Dorval is a bigoted Hugo-“ not, and her father (an enemy to the “ League) was accessary to the death of i( my illustrious relative St. André. She “ has beauty and genius, and my son will “ consign my grandchildren wholly to her u care. Dare 1 confide further in you? “ Will you engage to assist me in saving' “ the souls of my progeny ?’ I pledged “ myself, by all that was sacred, to be true to whatever service he designed me. ct * Go then’ said he, ‘ enter the family of my son on the plea of being discarded ct from mine : you will not be the less “ welcome on that account. When that “ unduteous son becomes a father, seize “ on the first opportunity of securing the c< child, and send it to France. I have i( made Sebastiau, my servant and your u countryman, your colleague in the bu-“ siness. He is already gone to Italy,

“ and settled himself in the neighbour-C4 hood of the villa de Fiora. To him

ST. DOMINICK.

121

c: you will consign the child. If it is a ‘6 female, he is to place it in the convent “ of St. Dominick ; if a male, in the priory “ of the Augustines. The superiors of u T)oth are known to me as eminent in “ piety, and devoted to the promotion of “ the true faith. The infant shall be re-“ ceived, as it were, on the charitable in-u stitutions of the convent, but the ab-“ bess of St. Dominick, or the grand “ prior, shall afterwards be instructed as “ to the rank and name of their infant “ member. When it has attained its “ eighteenth year, and the principles of <c religion are sown in its mind beyond u the power of being eradicated, I will u own it as my grandchild. Meantime, “ do you secure your situation in my son’s “ household, that I may claim your ser-“ vices on a similar and future occasion.* “ My lord then, having bound me by the “ most solemn oaths never to reveal this “ circumstance until his grandchild should “ have attained its eighteenth year, prc-

VOL. III.	F

122

THE NOVICE OF

#c sented me with a purse of gold, and pro-ie mised me double the^ sum when 1 should “ have fulfilled the sacred trust commit-“ ted to my charge.*

“ The next day I set off for Italy. I was received into your family, my lord ; <£ yet I thought, or fancied, the countess “ beheld me with no favorable eye. Mean-“ time I endeavoured to habituate your infant daughter to my person : I fre-(( quently walked out with her attendant, cc and eased her of her burthen by carry-“ ing the infant home in my arms. One “ day, as we returned, the countess per-u ceived us from the window, and I heard

* This species of holy kidnapping- was practised by Madame Maintenon with singular success after the revocation of the edict of Nantes by Louis X1Y. A recent instance of this description of pious fraud took place in the kingdom of Ireland, when the young

earl of G------was carried off from his family, by a

French Jesuitical tutor, to France, lest the heresies of his mother should affect the orthodoxy of his religious tenets.

ST. DOMINICK.

123

u her say to the nurse, * Ursuline, do not “ trust the child to that fierce-looking* “ Spaniard. About this time, you, my “ lord, set off for France. The cause of fe your journey was not known, but the “ reason generally assigned was your fa-<c ther's indisposition. Your absence t{ seemed the most favorable opportunity for executing a project which even my “ growing affection for your infant, as te well as the publicly-professed heresies “ of its mother, urged me to accomplish. i6 It was a few days before your expected “ return that I beheld the countess, and cc her woman with the infant, walk to-“ wards the wood; and I overheard ma-“ dame St. Dorval say that she would 4C send back the child. I flew to Sebas-“ tian, who lived on the skirts of the wood, and we returned, muffled up in “ long clokes, just as Ursuline was walk-ing back towards the villa with her “ charge. The countess was out of sight ; “ all was still and solitary. We seized the

THE NOVICE OE

u terrified Ursuline, who, almost lifeless “ with terror, vainly endeavoured to pro-u tect her sleeping charge. Leaving u Sebastian to secure the woman beyond “ the power of effecting her own libera-tion, I flew with the infant to his cot-u tage. In a short time he returned. I “ gave him a letter for your father, “ wherein I described the person of your child, the mark on her left cheek, and “ the cross which had belonged to the lady your mother, which was suspended u from her neck, and which she had her-ff self chosen from a number of more “ brilliant trinkets, as if Heaven itself “ inspired her ; I then delivered her to Se-t( bastian, who that night set off for “ France. Having left the lady Imogen at the convent of St. Dominick, he “ was to return to the chateau de St. ct Dorval, to receive the large reward “ promised him by my lord the count. “ When I returned to the villa de Fiora, “ 1 found all there horror, consternation.

,r	*	■ ' * -*r ir

•	-	tr	-	-	»	«	<	.	)

'rC. • « ».*>♦	►	*m	nr

/- •	m»*r	**•	■-

•	%	• *■	-	I or- - »| S#

• --	•	r	-s*	•	4*.	%"4 * éa

•	’4, •	•	%	f	â	•

«Lite- «“• r* * »•*«■ t» •>’.» *

*	•	r..	.

• ■

....	t	ri	* .•	-

- mr-1-	-■	.	t	»	•

^ •	*«*•>.	»« 'ff*

"••«W II ...»	»

*• «*• '• !«*» -4* If*-«U J 4	• *v

••	^	»•	I	i*	*1	^	-^m

•	•«**>	—> ~xk

«	I	*oir*n	»	•U--ê

.... . •• .. . ...

w>'‘ iA.(*■* ’•-•4»



126

THE NOVICE OF

‘f When lie heard of my lord's death,

stun»' with disappointment and rage, he “ threatened to discover all to you. This ff brought on words between us; we were ic botli armed, we both fought, and I was “ the victor ; lie expired at my feet, con-“ fessing, in the agonies of death, that the “•jewels which the child wore when I de-“ livered her to his care he had purloined, “ leaving nothing with her but the cross. “ These jewels I secured, and returned “ to my own country, from theapprehen-“ sion that you would shortly arrive in “ yours.’*

Here, faint and exhausted, the Spaniard paused ; while on the countenance of the count de St. Dorval struggled the awakened feelings of the husband and the father, wound up to vengeance on the bigoted destroyer of his peace, with the humanity of the man unwilling to disturb the last sad hours of the dying sinner. Imogen hung on her father’s shoulder, and with tender caresses endeavoured to soothe

ST. DOMINICK.

127

the perturbation of his spirits; while the chevalier adroitly awakened another tone of thought, by taking* the ring from the count, and, addressing the invalid, demanded if he had not lately served in the king of France’s army? A hectic of a moment flushed the wan cheek of the Spaniard, and, after a short hesitation, he replied, with gloomy firmness, “ Yes, and i( I deserted from it; but I am now be-yond tbe influence of all human ven-“ gcance. What is the power of all the li kings in the world to him who is on “ the point of leaving it for ever! It was “ necessity, not inclination, forced me to iC enlist in the French service. After an “ absence of seventeen years, during “ which I sustained some trials, I return-c£ ed to France with the Spanish troops “ under the duke de Mansfield. My ofti-“ cer treated me ill; 1 resented it, was a doomed to condign punishment, andde-“ serted to the enemy; but shortly after, “ becoming possessed of a considerable

128

THE NOVICE OF

“ sum of money, I left the royal army to return once more to my native country. “ The fear of being' taken up as a de-“ serter obliged me to take such unfre-“ quented paths as would secure me from “ discovery. When within a short dis-“ tance of this city, I was attacked and €( plundered by banditti, who deprived me “ of every thing but a ring I concealed in my bosom.”

‘‘And how came you by this ring demanded the chevalier.

“ That it concerns thee not to know, “ monsieur,” returned the Spaniard gloomily ; “ my confessor has been al-ready here.”

“ You are right/’ said the chevalier coolly ; “ it concerns me not to learn what *' I already know. This ring, which the “ master of the inn has put into our pos-“ session, you took with a purse of gold, 44 about two months back, from a young u person confined in the chateau le Noir.” The invalid changed colour, a deadly

ST. flOMlNICK.

m

paleness overspread his face, and he faintly replied: “ Well, sir, it is true; and “ what then 5 it was the purchase of his; “ life and liberty.”

“ Stephano,” interrupted Imogen, doi “ you not recollect me ?	/	was the per-

ff son from whom you took this ring and cc purse in the armoury of chateau le Noir. tc But you did indeed give me life and li~ ** berty, and I am still your debtor.” Stephano looked at her in eager amazement.

“ Yes,” said the chevalier, (< made-il moiselle de St. Dorval was flying fronru “ the monastic life to which your mis~ “ taken and bigoted zeal had doomed’ 4‘ her. Disguised as a minstrel, she was^ u taken prisoner in the chateau le Noir,. “ and would probably have lost her life “ but for the investment of the chateau “ by a party of the royalists. This ring, “ which you took from her, was given her w as a legacy by the deceased canoness of

THE NOVICE OF

“ St. Dominick) and bears the initials of u her name.”

The invalid looked wildly round ; his ghastly eyes alternately fixed on Imogen and her father, till, resting on the former, lie exclaimed, “ My crimes have not been cc few, but I have saved thy soul from per-c< dition 3 and He who died for us all will u have mercy on mine.”

As he spoke his voice failed, his eyes closed, and he sank back on the couch. Lethargy, produced by the rapid mortification of his wounds, was creeping over his senses; the characters of death were seizing every feature, its chillness stiffening every limb. The chevalier drew the count’s arm through his, and, taking Imogen’s hand, led them out of the apartment, consigning the dying man to the care of the host, who had remained in the room during the whole extraordinary scene. When they readied their own apartments, the count, embracing Imogen, exclaimed in great agitation, u My child,

ST. DOMINICK.

131

u my beloved child! you are a second C( time restored tome, and mystery nolon-“ ger clouds the joy of possessing thee.” Then,taking the chevalier’s arm, he added. Suffer me to retire for a short time ; <c this extraordinary occurrence has awa-“ kened feelings, emotions, 1 am but little “ able to sustain.”

The chevalier led him to his own apartment, and returned to Imogen. tc Such,” said he, <f is the dreadful effect of bigotry. “ The mistaken zeal of your grandfather “ was the efficient cause of your mother’s “ death, your father’s misery, and your es-ct trangement from your parents and the 11 world; but let us imitate the delicacy “ of your father, who has not, in the acu-“ test agony of awakened sorrow, breath-“ ed, even to the ear of friendship, one “ reproach against your grandsire’s me* u mory. Let us, in the consciousness of kindred frailty, judge the actions of the “ living as we would wish to be judged, “ and tread lightly o’er the ashes of the

TUE NOVICE OF

When the count joined them at dinner, he appeared more dispirited and weak than he had been since the commencement of their journey. In the evening Stephano expired. When the count heard of his death he shuddered; then, after a long reverie, he put his purse into the chevalier's hand, and bid him present it to their host as a reward for his humanity to the deceased, and to defray the expenses of his interment.

CHAP. XXIII.

Dolce sentier

Colle, che mi piacesti

Ov’e ancor per usanza amor mi mina

Ben riconosco in voi l’usate forme

Non lasso in me.

De cor d’un figlia

La sventura maggiore

De tutte le sventure e il suo duolore.

Mctastasio.—Catonê.

THE next morning they embarked on the Genoese gulph for Italy ; a brisk gale

ST. DOMINICK.

133

filled their sails, and the day clear and bright rendered the rich scenery of the surrounding coasts discernible on every side ; the maritime towns of Prance, which skirted the picturesque shores, gradually seemed to retreat behind them ; a lofty tower or glittering spire alone marked their situation ; while above the lowland scenery, and to the north of the state of Genoa, arose the Appenines’ stupendous heights, and the island of Corsica appeared to float on the blue unruffled bosom of the sea, forming a beautiful and striking object to the south. Imogen, whose susceptible spirits easily regained their native tone of animation, gazed with eager delight on the receding coast of France; while, as they softened into perspective, a tear swelled to her eye, and her lips pronounced, “ Adieu, dear France !” while her heart only sighed, “ Adieu, be-u loved de Montargis !” Meantime the count alone seemed insensible to the charms of a scene the chevalier took par-

134

THE NOTICE OF

ticular pleasure in pointing’ out to his daughter : his heart, saddened by those gloomy visions which the occurrence of the preceding day had conjured into being, seemed lost in the recollection of its former woes, and dead to the enjoyment of its present happiness. It was in vain that the tender and all-solicitous Imogen pointed out to his observation the gradually discernible and glowing beauties of the Italian shores, which rose on the eye in all the rich luxuriancy of the happiest soil and climate, covered with the rich drapery of the vineyard, shaded with lofty groves, and spangled over with smiling villages, magnificent palaces, and venerable monasteries; the count had “that within” which mocked the power of external influence to subdue; and in approaching Italy he only felt lie approached the tomb of Julia. After a quick and delightful voyage, they landed at Leghorn; while the mind of Imogen, as for the first time she touched Italian ground.

ST. DOMINICK.

135

glowed with that enthusiasm and pleasure which result from feelings awakened by reflection, taste, and learning*; and from the consciousness of being on that country immortalized by the attestations of history, consecrated by the effusions of genius, hallowed by the atchievements of valour and heroism, and enriched with all that art and science could bestow.

They proceeded along the delicious banks of the Arno to the villa de Fiora, which they reached in the evening of their second clay’s journey. It was a light and elegant structure of the Doric order, embosomed in avale, whose luxuriant beauties might have rivaled the fabled charms of Tempe; its portico, cf Parian marble, descended by a flight of steps to a branch of the Arno, and commanded a bold view of the surrounding country, and a distant prospect of the city of Florence; its groves of orange and citron shed a perpetual odour, and the shade of its extensive woods bestowed perpetual freshness. The

136

THE NOVICE OF

delight, the rapture, with which Imogen contemplated this fairy palace, was tempered by the recollection of her unfortunate mother, and subdued by the increasing and impressive melancholy of her father. Her heart beat with violence as their vehicle stopped before that portico which her mother had mentioned in her last letter, and where she had so often sat to watch the return of her lord, while the tears stole down her colourless cheek as she caught the languished glance of her father’s expressive eye. The chevalier, far from unmoved, with that self subjection which always distinguishes eminent virtue, repressed his own emotioffto administer to the sufferings of his friend, whom he supported on his arm to the house; while Imogen, catching his presence of mind, walked beside her father, tenderly drawing his arm through her own. The count, as he slowly passed through the portico and vestibule, paused and looked round ; then, raising his eyes to

ST. DOMINICK.

13?

heaven, mournfully shook his head, pressed the hands of his daughter and his friend, and proceeded in melancholy silence ; while tender and mournful recollection, throbbing at his heart, awakened the spring of affliction, and shed over his countenance and form that expression of profound and disconsolate woe which no hope enlivens, no time can efface. Exhausted and wholly overcome, when he reached the apartment where he had taken a last leave of his wife, he swooned in the arms of his friend; while Imogen, no longer able to suppress her feelings, wept bitterly, and indulged in the agony of a heart which trembled for the loss of its dearest tie. When the count recovered, he was conveyed to bed, and, wearied out by the excess of his emotions, he soon fell into a soft and profound repose.

“ Such,” said the chevalier, as he stood at a window conversing with the weeping Imogen on the subject of her father’s af-

138

THE IS'OVICE OF

diction, ff such is the effect of immode-<c rate sensibility, unregulated by reason. “ After a lapse of eighteen years, your “ father suffers as keenly as in the first “ period of his misfortune: but he suffers because he icishcs to suffer; because “ his heart, long given up to the indul-“ genee of sensibility, revels on the luxury “ of icoe.'}

“ Oh ! my dear sir," interrupted Imogen, “ is it then so easy to subdue the “ pangs of lacerated feeling, to heal the “ wounds of a bleeding heart?”

“ No,” said the chevalier; “if it were “ easy, there were then no merit in the “ effort; but it is possible; and where Cf possibility is on the side of virtue and “ reason, it should not be neglected for “ the indulgence of emotions purely sclf-se ish. It is a sorry truth, my sweet young (i friends, that this life is but probationary “ to another scene of trial and suffering; “ and to encourage that exquisite and “ acute sense of feeling, that refined sen-

ST. DOMINICK.

139

u sibility, that delicate and sensitive tone “ of mind, which awakens the sensation “ of agony or bliss to its last strained “ pitch of suffering or enjoyment, is, from <f the paucity of the latter and the many ‘‘ subjects for the former, to render ex-istence insupportable, to deprive socie-“ ty of that portion of assistance [which “ individually we are obliged to furnish, “ and to pervert the use of that reason u which Providence has mercifully en-dowed us with as the counterbalance “ to our feelings, our passions, and our (( weaknesses.”

fC You are right, sir,” said Imogen, extending to him her hand, €t you are always right; with you I always agree; but in “ the present instance I cannot help feel' “ ing with my father.”

The chevalier kissed the hand presented to him; and Imogen crept softly to her father’s couch, to watch his slumbers and pray for his recovery.

in a few days the first emotions of re-

THE NOVICE OF

vived affliction subsided in the bosom of the count, and a calm and pensive composure took possession of his mind. To repose in the shade of that portico whose polished pillars had so often reflected the form of Juliet; to fix his languid gaze on those inanimate objects over which her eyes had beamed, was an indulgence sad though grateful to his heart; while the animated looks and cheering prattle of his blooming daughter smoothed the furrow of his care-worn brow, and chased the tear from his colourless cheek. Imogen not only feigned an unusual flow of vivacity, in the hope of re-animating her father’s drooping heart, but really felt that exhilaration of spirits the air, the climate, and scenery, united to youth, health, and imagination, were so calculated to inspire. Hurried away by a wild delirium of pleasure, as she pursued her rambles through scenes of fairy enchantment, even the secret passion of her heart lost its pensive sadness ; and while a thousand tender

ST. DOMINICK.

141

recollections of him who had inspired it floated on her mind, and blended their hues with all its emanations, from the faded blossoms of her blighted love sprung a thousand “ tender buds of hope.” De Montargis was not yet the husband of mademoiselle de V--------, and it was possi-

ble he never might; while that possibility existed, despair could boast no empire over the mind of Imogen. One morning, after a long delightful walk on the banks of the Arno, she returned in that flush of health and spirits which always restored the native gaiety of her character, and, Entering the saloon where the chevalier and the count sat conversing, she took the hands of the latter, and, pressing them to her lips, demanded with animation :

“ Tell me, dearest sir, do you not in-“ hale a new existence in this delightful “ country ? do you not feci that health “ and pleasure are borne on the wing of " every fragrant gale ?”

The count, with an affectionate smile.

142

THE NOVICE OF

embraced her. ff This charming child,” said he, turning to de Sorville, while a faint hectic flushed his cheek, throws me back into that sweet era of life when happiness,4 under a thousand varying ff forms, stood tip-toe to receive me ; tf while, like the careless butterfly, I still “ fluttered on the sunny surface of exist-€t ence, in eager wandering quest after in-“ finite variety and infinite pleasure.”

“ But, my dear father,” said Imogen, tc does not every age bring with it its own “ pleasure, as each season is endowed “ with a charm peculiar to itself? If the cf gay livery of renovating Spring delight» % the eye, and the odorous freshness of (C Summer charms the sense, do not the “ mellow and sober charms of Autumn “ awaken a tender interest in the mind, and the close-knitting socialties of Win-“ ter reach and warm the heart?”

tf This assertion comes sweetly from ec thy lips, my sweet child ; oh ! may it be ce prophetic ! and may each season of this

ST. DOMINICK.

143

“ chanceful life come fraught to thee <c with some new blessing*, richer than that “ which has gone by ! may the flash of “ thy early sensations, as they expire oil “ the wing of Time, give place to more “ solid enjoyments 3 and may the raptur-<f ous dreams of thy youth, as they subside “ in the truths of experience, be succeed-

ed bv that stable and permanent fell-“ city which virtue and wisdom only con-“ fer !**

Imogen imprest a tender and grateful hiss on her father’s hand; then insensibly falling into a reverie, after a short silence she exclaimed :

And yet, to survive the power of “awakening, of receiving happiness; to “ watch the gradual decay of each sweet “ emotion, the ardour of every feeling “ fading into inanity ; to weep over the “ wreck of each beloved tie, and feel 69 that every succeeding day tolls out the “ death of some sweet sensation with that “ of youth ; oh ! who would live for that?’*

144	THE NOVICE OF

“ 1 have!” said the count emphatically, clasping his hands; ff hope’s delusive me-" teors now cease to play on my insensate “ heart; and the visions of recollected (C happiness do hut sadden the mind they “ once in reality gladdened.’*

,f My dear friend,” said the chevalier,, rising and seating himself between them, as he took a hand of either, ec it is the folly “ of man to suffer the immediate blessings “ of the present to escape unenjoyed, in “ the vain anticipation of future evil, or <f the useless regret for expired felicity ; " it is for the wise only to use the present “ to the promotion of virtue and happi-“ ness ; looking back without regret, and “ forward without fear; and to employ “ the existing moment well, is to secure <f the possibility of both. What say you, my sweet Imogen, to becoming the dis-“ ciple of this almost-Epicurean philoso-

u phy?”

(( Of whatever philosophy you are the founder,” said Imogen expressively, u 1

ST. DOMINICK.

145

“ shall become its disciple, convinced that which you have chosen for the rule of “ your life must be the best ; but too ff happy to be permitted to repose the “ frailty and weakness of my own mind “ on the strength and excellence of your ff better reason. To be considered as i( your pupil, to hope at a future period “ to be worthy of becoming your friend, “ to be guided by your counsels, and sti-“ mulated by your example in the pursuit of all most worthy to be attained, would iS be the boast and happiness of my life.'* As she spoke, the ardor of her manner brought an involuntary blush to her cheek, and, with an air of affectionate simplicity and tender animation, she placed both her hands in his. A deep scarlet suffused the pale cheek of the chevalier; his eyes flashed fire, and the hand with which he scarcely returned the pressure of Imogen’s trembled. The count de St. Dorval arose; a radiant beam of delight and satisfaction illumined his countenance : pressing the hands of

VOL. HI.	G

TUE N0\ ICE OF

his daughter and friend in his own, he exclaimed :

. “ De Sorville, to you and to your care I “ consign this treasure of my soul : when “ death shall have robbed her of a father, “ be thou unto her as a parent; when “ death shall have robbed thee of a friend, “ seek in her heart for a revival of that i( tenderness her father bore thee, and u thou wilt not be disappointed; and,

“ oh!-----” The count abruptly paused;

something of importance seemed to agitate his mind and flutter on his lips : while Imogen, construing his silent emotion into the language of her affectionate fears, pressed his hands to her lips, and said, ff L Ci hope, I feel, it is yet long reserved for “ me to claim no father but you.”

“ Come, come, my dear friend/* said the chevalier, cheerily, “ 1 must chide *e you for the indulgence of this truly “ childish melancholy : would you give f‘ an artificial poignancy to the strong na-‘ tural sensibility of this too-sensible be-

ST. DOMINICK.

147

“ ing, and fling over the briglitening dawn “ of her life those clouds your too sensi-<c tive feelings have hung upon the even-" ing of your own ?”

God forbid !” said the count emphatically ; “ may she not inherit, mueh less <c imbibe, the dangerous and fatal sensi-bility of her parents!” then, alternately embracing the chevalier and his daughter, he left the room. Imogen was on the point of following, but, fancying she observed in the chevalier's eloquent eye a lurking wish that she should remain, she seated herself again, and .drew her embroidery frame towards her. The chevalier was still silent; and, after musing a moment at the window, threw himself upon its seat, and drew a book from his pocket. Imogen, insensibly reverting to the solemnity of her father’s last address, continued to muse and work, forgetful of the cause which first detained her; when, accidentally raising her eyes to the face of the chevalier, she observed his earnestly

THE NOVICE OF

fixed, not on the book which lay open in his hand, but on her, Imogen, in some confusion, asked what was his study ?

“ An analysis of the human heart,” said he, with a pointed smile.

“ If you do not think the subject above “ my comprehension/' added Imogen simply, ‘e perhaps you would have the good-“ ness to read aloud.”

Éf Above your comprehension !” returned the chevalier, flinging away the book, and seating himself by her. “ No, Imo-gen, I know not of any study above Cf your comprehension, though experi-“ ence may be requisite to guide you in “ this.”

c< Imogen, with a smile full of expression, said, “ I fear, my dear sir, you esti-“ mate my capacity by the standard of “ your partiality rather than your judg-" ment.”

“ It is your modesty only, Imogen, can <c lead you to believe kit: no, if I suppo-€C sed-there existed a being who thought

u

ST. DOMINICK.

149

r< more highly of you than I do myself, I would willingly forego my own opinion “ for the adoption of his.”

Imogen blushed and bowed at a compliment so little expected, and the first ever paid her by one little in the habit of fiattering. After a short pause, the chevalier added, “ I should wish, perhaps, for the sake of my charming friend, and “ the world through which she has to “ struggle, that those elevated qualities <( with which she is eminently endowed *c were tempered by those minor quali-“ ties, so necessary to oppose to the little “ every-day vicissitudes of life. Your “ understanding, of the first order, and *• formed for the reception of the subli-mest truths, will oft neglect the observ-<f ance of those lesser documents which <f the world hourly calls into practice ; and “ that mind, created for the boldest ef-“ forts, will insensibly soar beyond the ‘f little forms which that quality the world calls prudence dictates. And should

THE NOVfCE OF

ic you, my charming friend, in your walk “ through life, ever betray in your con-“ duct or actions the fraility of human na-ff ture rather than its strength, it will be tc only in those trivial occurrences which <c cautious stupidity and prudent dulness “ never violate; but, where an extraor-cf dinary effort of the soul is required, yours will be equal to the noblest bold-çst exertion; where the heroism of the “ mind is exacted, you will ever be the “ heroine. But you seem so overpower-fc ed, my too humble friend; by eulo-gium, not merely prophetic, but al-“ ready earned, that we will change the et subject. I have just got letters from “ France; one of a disappointing nature “ from my sister, madame de Rosemont, “ who is now at Paris, engaged in a law-suit with the heir of her late husband, “ which will defer her journey to Italy f f for some months ; this I particularly re-“ gret, not only on my own account but <r yours. My sister, though not a stri-

ST. DOMINICK.

151

“ king, not a brilliant, is an amiable, character ; and I have looked forward “ with great pleasure to a friendship be-tween two persons so deservedly dear " to me."

Imogen, in terms equally warm and polite, regretted the detention of madame de Rosemont, who, as the friend of the canoness of St. Dominick, and the sister of the chevalier de Sorville, she was prepared to love and esteem : while, with an air affectedly indifferent, a throbbing heart, and an apparent eager attention to her work, she demanded if his letters brought any news ?

<c My letters/* said the'chevalier, “were a all on business, save my sister’s, who “ merely says, that the most prevalent to-“ pic of fashionable chit-chat is the mar-“ riage of the baron de Montargis with

“ the lady de Y-------. This, you know,

“ is quite a lady’s theme, and my sister is <c absolutely descriptive :—here are her own words.” The chevalier then read

THE NOVICE OF

as follows: “ The splendor of these nup-if tials exceeds any thing of the kind ever 4< seen at Paris ; the ostentatious propen-<c sities of the two fathers were called into “ action, and each seemed only anxious “ to rival the other in magnificence and “ shew: the king and the whole court as-“ sisted at the ceremony : there was held u in the morning a tournament, in hon-u our of the occasion, at the arsenal; the ii bride bestowed the prizes on the victor; “ in the evening there was a masquerade

“ at the hotel de V-----, and the next day

“ the bridal party set off for the chateau “ de Montargis in Provence/’

A bolt of ice seemed to shoot through the heart of Imogen, and circulate its deadly chillness through every artery in her frame : her temples throbbed with agony, her head grew giddy, her eyes appeared covered with a mist, her languid pulse scarcely fluttered with the throb of life; her lips-, burning and parched, trembled without the power of articulation ;

ST. DOMINICK.

153

and her cheeks alternately betrayed the deepest blushes or the deadliest whiteness. Endeavouring to catch at some little presence of mind to veil the agony of her feelings, she drooped her head on her work, and faintly made some appropriate but inarticulate observations.

The chevalier, who still appeared engaged with his sister’s letter, replied* u The marriage of the baron de Montar-

“ gis with mademoiselle de V---------- was

(t on his part, I am pretty certain, one “ of those efforts of reason which distin-‘‘ gnish a great mind, conscious of its Ct own strength, and determined to exert i{ it. The inclinations of the baron were “ not, I believe, at first on the side of “ this union; probably some romantic ‘‘ attachment, some youthful infatuation, “ enslaved his wishes and his heart, and u opposed themselves to his reason and his prudence: but the victory was at “ last declared in favour of the latter; g 2

J 54

TUE NOVICE OF

“ and many years of felicity, I hope and “ believe, will be the reward of a tempo-<e rary sacrifice of his inclinations.” Then, folding up his letters, he said he would go and seek the count; and left the apartment without appearing to notice or perceive the no-longer-concealed emotion of Imogen.

ST. DOMINICK,

155

CHAP. XXIV.

Par (Pillnstres efforts les grands cœurs se connussent.

J. Corneille—Ariadne.

--------- The intellectual power

Bends from his awful throne a wond’ring ear.

And smiles;—the passions gently sooth’d away, Sink to divine repose.

Akenside.

DREADFUL to the soul is that moment when the lingering light of hope is finally extinguished, and all its sweet energies of fond expectation are buried in the gloom of despondency ; when the sad certainty of irrevocable disappointment falls ljke a thunderbolt on the heart, and reason, dispossessed of her empire by the shock, can neither assuage nor combat its effects. There was nothing more ta be expected than the union of the baron dc Montargis with mademoiselle de V. >

THE NOVICE OF

yet Imogen heard it as if she expected it never were to have taken place; and heard it with the same emotion as the certainty of being lost to happiness for ever would have awakened. Voluntarily to have resigned her lover, and such a lover, was an act of heroism grateful to the ambition of her mind and self-love ; and to be conscious that his passion survived its hopes, soothed her heart for the sacrifice it had made : but what is so difficult to be understood as the secret workings of the heart? Imogen, in resigning de Montar-gis, had not resigned every hope of being his, much less of being beloved. She believed he would still find means to protract or evade his marriage with the heiress de V------, and time, or the death of his fa-

ther, might vanquish that discord that subsisted between the two families : in short, when love exists, the heart is prodigal in its fanciful speculations; and Imogen loved with the same romantic enthusiasm, the same profound tenderness and refined deli-

ST. DOMINICK..

157

cacy as in the first era of awakened passion. She was not created to inspire or to feel sentiments of indifference : the fire of genius, the ardour of affection, the vivacity of temyerament, the poignancy of feeling; that vivid,, that excessive sensibility to every species of happiness, which rendered her enjoyments so exquisite, her sufferings so acute, still spoke to her in the voice of Nature, and said, Thou “ wert created to love and to be loved ; “ thou wert created for all the most pre-<( cious relations of society.” But the object which s*he believed alone capable, alone worthy, of filling her heart, of awakening all its energies, was now lost to her for ever. How often, since her separation from Montargis, had she compared the past and present inanity of her life with those exquisite but short lived moments, when she felt all the value of existence; when the subtile spirit of felicity circulated through every vein, and all the energies of the mind, all the raptures

158

THE NOVICE OF

of the heart and imagination, combined'to render lier blessed. To feel great and powerful emotions was requisite to her happiness, by the very organization of her mind ; and to live without some object capable of awakening them, was to her the death of the soul.

Full of the jealous fears of affection, Imogen believed that the speedy union of Montargis was the effect of his vanquished love for her. ,f I might have “ known/' said she, while tears of agony coursed her cheek, that passions so “ vehement, so ardent, must be short-lived in their effects; but, enamoured

-	of the deception of my own heart, I

-	fondly believed what it would have

been misery to doubt.”

If any thing could add to the anguish of that heart, it was the difficult obligation of concealing its woes. Imogen was not only doomed to suffer without the soothing consolation of pouring her afflictions in the bosom of a friend, but

ST. DOMINICK.

159

to hide them from every eye under the veil of assumed complacency. Her father, but little observing, and wholly unsuspicious of the cause, appeared not to notice its effects; but Imogen trembled to encounter the all-piercing eye, the all-penetrating observation, of de Sorville. She had, indeed, long cherished some faint suspicion that the secret of her ten derness for de Montargis was not unknown to him ; and his preliminary eulogium on the strength and heroism of her mind, previous to his informing her of the baron's marriage, seemed to intimate that he was on the point of putting that heroism to the test. The love of de Montargis was alone more desirable to the heart of Imogen than the esteem and admiration of de Sorville, whom in virtue and understanding she considered as the first of all created beings; and that ambitious desire of eminence and of intellectual superiority, which seemed breathed into her soul when it was first quickened,

160

THE NOVICE OF

determined her on proving lierself worthy of that respect and admiration she had already inspired.

“ Yes,” said she, “ you shall not be “ deceived, great and amiable de Sor-" ville. The eulogium you have pro-nounced shall be prophetici: where an “ extraordinary effort of the soul is re-“ quired, mine shall be equal to the boldest u exertion ; when the heroism of the mind “ is exacted, I can be the heroine. If thou dost not suspect the weakness of “ my heart, my conduct shall never be-“ tray it ; and if thou dost, the command I “ hold over myself shall extort your es-“ teem and receive your admiration.”

Such was the resolution which Imogen, even in the first moment of awakened suffering, had formed, but which, till the expiration of three suffering days and sleepless nights, she had not the power to reduce to practice. Reason was then be-come the basis of her endeavours, and tile indignant pride of disappointed love

ST. DOMINICK.

161

her auxiliary. A tear no longer dimmed the lustre of her eye, or impressed its trace on her cheek. Those frequent absences from her father’s side gradually diminished, and the solitary walks of the morning’s dawn or evening’s twilight were no longer pursued in the unfrequented shades of de Fiora ; while she congratulated herself that her melancholy escaped her father’s observation, who was deeply engaged in erecting a magnificent monument to the memory of his wife on the spot where she had parted with her child. Still more did she triumph in the absence of the chevalier, who had gone to spend a few days at Florence. Always great where great occasions offered, and where the sacrifice was repaid by the consciousness of those superior powers which had effected it, Imogen not only adminstered to her “ mind dis-“ eased” the salutary prescriptions of reason, but, by one bold effort of the soul, to pluck up the hidden sorrow by the root :

THE NOVICE OF

“ I was not born/’ she proudly exclaimed, “ to be the slave of passion. Reason ff was not given me to slumber for ever ; ff talents were not bestowed on me to wi-fC ther in indolence ! I will employ them, “ and I shall then have no leisure to be cf wretched; I will destroy every object “ which by nurturing my weakness op-“ poses itself to my felicity.” Then with a tearless eye, but an unsteady hand, she drew forth the last note and letter she had received from the baron de Montargis, and, averting her head, tore them into a thousand pieces; and drawing from her bosom the beautiful picture of the minstrel, without bestowing on it one tender parting glance, she placed it in a little casket, which had belonged to her mother, the lock of which was so peculiarly constructed that no key but its own could open it. Having locked it, she advanced to the window, and threw the key into the Arno, which flowed beneath ; determined at some future period, when time and re-

ST. DOMINICK.

163

flection left not a wreck behind of her former tenderness, to return the picture to its original.

When the chevalier returned, Imogen flew to receive him with eager satisfaction smiling ir> her countenance. She found him seated in the portico with the count. As he advanced to meet her, she fancied his glance seemed to search her soul ; yet she met its inquiries with an eye-illumined with the bright beam of self - approbation, with a cheek glowing with the triumphant blush of conscious self-subjection. Seating herself between her father and her friend, while the latter still held the hand so affectionately presented to him, and gazed on her with looks whose penetration was tempered with delight at a reception so flatteringly cordial, Imogen, with that air of naïveté which always rendered her so infatuatingly pleasing, said, “ My dear (i chevalier, you will scarcely believe how “ I have longed for your return.”

164

THE NOVICE OF

“ Scarcely indeed, Imogen/’ said the chevalier with a meaning smile.

“ Then call on me as a witness, my “ dear,” said the count, with obvious satisfaction ; “ for I do not think I per-tf ccived a smile on your lip since he left “us; and that, chevalier, is at least a " presumptive proof in favour of the vera-“ city of her assertion/’

Imogen, colouring to the eyes, continued in the same strain of gaiety, yet avoiding the chevalier’s glances: “ You “ must know I have formed a thousand “ schemes, which you must help me to “ execute ; in short, every age has its “education, and it is time mine should “ begin. You all seem to forget that the “ education of a monastery is not calcu-“ lated for the world ; that my knowledge “ of those pious disputes between the Do-“ minicans and the Capuchins, on the or-“ thodox cut of the monastic cowl, will “scarcely be an equivalent for my want “ of those elegant acquirements so requi-

ST. DOMINICK.

165

“ site in the polished circles of life ; and ct that, though deeply versed in celestial ct mysteries, a little knowledge of tern-" poral forms might be of some use : in “ fact, 1 would know every thing, and I “ know nothing. In the scale of refined rf accomplishment 1 would rank high, and c< yet I am reduced to the lowest degree. “ With a mind whose activity demands “ unceasing occupation, I do and learn “ nothing; and in a country where the " arts and sciences received their birth, " I am neither a painter, a statuary, “ nor a musician, and yet I would be all. “ My ambition is boundless, my talents, I “ believe, not despicable, and my applica-“ tion unwearied. My dear father, my dear chevalier, assist me to second the “ intentions of nature, and to render my-“ self more worthy of your esteem and ap-“ probation. Only place me in the path “ of improvement, and you shall find I “ will soon rise above the dependence of “ a pupil. 1 have always entertained

THE NOVICE OF

€t the most elevated ideas of the human “ mind, and believed it is only requisite “ it should possess the ambition to excel “ in any pursuit to attain to consummate " perfection, admitting it to be endowed “ with those principles of taste which form “ the elements of all our talents, of all " our knowledge, and which must arise “ from the consciousness of our own native “ feelings.”

Imogen ceased to speak, while the energy of her manner still blushed its ardor on her cheek. The count, embracing her with a look of tender triumph, warmly applauded her resolution ; and, while he regretted that the state of his own delicate health prevented him undertaking (he grateful task of superintending those studies, in whose pursuit she panted to engage, he insinuated a hope that the chevalier would not decline the interesting office of his representative. De Sorville, with eyes still ardently fixed on the face of Imogen,

ST. DOMINICK.

167

awakened from his abstraction by this appeal, and with great earnestness and great modesty replied, that to be the preceptor of mademoiselle de St. Dorval was an honour too flattering to be declined, yet too important to-be embraced without the apprehension of conscious inability. “ So far, however/' he continued, “■ as experience can regulate the ardent sallies of genius, and point its “ energies towards objects worthy of pur„ suit, my little stock of already-acquired information shall not be wanting to as-sist the intuitive powers of her supe-<<r rior mind. The steady pursuit of “ knowledge, of useful as well as elegant “ acquirements, so invariably betrayed by “ our sweet young friend, is the distin-guishing characteristic of genius united to good sense. It is only for intel-tf lectual mediocrity to repose in the “ stupid satisfaction of moderate and homespun acquirements, too easily at-<f tained to be much prized, when pos-

168

THE NOVICE OF

“ sessed, either by the possessor or the cf observer. It is foï the superior mind €t to toil with unwearied assiduitv through

•/	o

cc progressive improvement to ultimate <f perfection ; stimulated by obstacle, not “ subdued, nor to halt in the path of fame, contented with an ovation where a tri-“ umph awaits the termination of their tc endeavours.”

Imogen’s eyes glistened with pleasure as she listened to these eulogiums, so delicately paid, so grateful to her ambition and her heart, and so powerfully stimu^ lating to her exertions.

The commencement of the ensuing week beheld the villa de Fiora transformed into a little Lyceum. Masters of the first eminence were engaged from Florence to intruct the eager, the ambitious Imogen in painting and music; a Spanish fandanguera, celebrated for the peculiar excellence of his stile of dancing and the composition of his ballads, modified the wild graces of nature into move-

ST. DOMINICK.

169

ments of determined elegance, and added to the elastic step, the airy bound, of youthful hilarity, all that art could bestow “ of the poetry of motion” The chevalier himself was her preceptor in the English and Italian languages; in the grammatical construction, her knowledge of the learned languages considerably assisted her, while her acute and correct ear made her mistress of the best accent and pronunciation, and she soon spoke la langua Tuscana, nil bocca “ Romana while her acquisition of the English, less promptly attained, from less opportunities of practice, and a remote analogy to the tongue she was accustomed to speak, was still sufficiently rapid to enable her in the course of a few months to read some of the most elegant English poets, to peruse with facility the effusions of lord Surrey’s muse, who had himself tasted of the Italian delicacies of composition, and transfused them into his own elegant works; and to be à portée of YOL. III.

THE NOVICE OF

some of the happiest dramas of Shak-spearc, Jonson, and Beaumont and Fletcher. But her voice modulated to all the melting softness of the Italian language, her airy imagination delighted with the style of its fanciful expression, and her •warm heart eagerly embracing its tender epithets of endearments, to clothe its own glowing feelings, it soon became familiar to her as though every other were yet to learn. The chevalier, while he applauded her rapid and extraordinary attainment of this charming language, was yet extremely cautious in his selection of its authors. On a shelf appropriated in her own library to their works were to be found a part of the Comedia of Dante, replete with a brilliancy of wit which almost compensates for the severity of its satire ; the entire of his Inferno, which, though obscured by an obsolete language and not destitute of blemishes, displays the vast power of all-creative genius; the Eclogues and Poems of Boccace, who at

ST. DOMINICK.

m

once carried his native language to its highest perfection ; the divine effusions of the enamoured Petrarch; the sonnets of Francis Sachette ; the immortal productions of Tasso and Ariosto; and the unfading beauties of Lorenzo de jyiçdicis’ charming muse. The chevalier also procured for her many of the lighter French works of modern date, which the library of Montmorell did not afford ; and she read with peculiar pleasure the poems of François de Martini, one of the best poets of the age ; the sportive lays of Rimi de Balleau, the French Anacreon; nor was old Pierre Ronsard forgotten, who had exhausted so many tender verses to the honour of his Mary, Silena, and Cassandra. While her eager mind thus luxuriated in “ the feast of reason,” and the genius of past and presort ages contributed to satisfy an appetite<ihat grew with what it fed on, the “flow of soul” ever awakened to the magic influence of music’s witching spell. When the mind re-

172

THE NOVICE OF

posed from the fatigue of scientific research or studious occupation, and the iimagination, weary of pursuing the blazing meteors of genius, sank to the enjoyment of its own delicious visions, then the harp of Imogen breathed its sweetest strains* and her clear, soft, and flexible, voice gave to the melting sentiment of passion or the frolic effusion of fancy a superadded charm. With all the advantages which nature, taste, and ability, added to the best models in painting and statuary, and the first artists Italy then produced, the progress of Imogen in these arts was still much slower than in music. Aspiring and impatient to become a proficient in that art of which love had been the inventor, she soon became not only an eminent proficient, but the foundress of a stile of singing and accompaniment then exclusively her ovW. The music of that day, like the poetry, full of elaborate contrivance, lost, under the influence of her superior genius and original taste, its intricate

\

ST. DOMINICK.

173

and uninteresting character, and, imitating the accent of sentiment and passion, gave to the soul the grateful intimation of all its own ecstatic sensibilities.

Endued with all those perceptions of mind which form the principal ingredient in the character of a poet and the painter, her residence in a country strikingly impressive from the glowing beauty of its climate, the gay and smiling aspect of its picturesque scenes, was well calculated to excite those enthusiastic emotions which give birth to poetic effusion, and awaken the imitative arts into life. Wandering with nature in her wildest haunts, the most delicious recesses, the vivacity of Imogen’s mind rose in proportion to the pleasures it received from external objects, and every day witnessed the fantastic birth of some little poetic extravaganza, some glowing view of nature in her happiest aspect, or some musical effusion that breathed the rapt soul of the enchanting musician.

To the elegant and liberal pursuits of

174

THE NOTICE OF

the constantly-occupied Imogen the society she mingled with highly contributed by the power of assimilation and the influence of sympathy. The chevalier’s long-settled habits of privacy and retirement, the count's still pensive spirits and declining health, rendered their visitors of necessity fe^v and select. The diocesan bishop, a man of patriarchal life and manners ; signor Orsalto Giustini, the elegant translator of Euripides ; the signor Dolce, who had so happily transfused all the pathos and spirit of Sophocles into his charming version of Ephigenia in Aulis ; the beautiful signora Lucrèce de Gongaga,* sojust-]y celebrated in the 16th century for her w it, learning, and literary productions ; with a few others, more distinguished by their virtues than the brilliancy of their talents, were the superior and elected few which enlarged the family circle of the villa de Fiora.

* Her works were collected and published at Vienna. Vide Bayle's Dictionary»

ST. DOMINICK.

175

Bat the heart does not always enter into the occupations of the mind ; the splendid images of fancy may woo but cannot always win its attention ; the bright effusion of genius may lull but cannot always still its pulse, or lure from its contemplation the vision which memory presents. To the comprehension of love nothing is so difficult as the science of forgetfulness: the efforts which the strong mind of Imogen had made towards its attainment had not wholly failed, but had not yet.wholly succeeded. But she had much yet to learn, for she had yet much to forget. Recollection still delighted to dwell on that era when love’s sunny beam first shone on the horizon of existence, and tinged every thought, every object, with its glow.— Fancy still loved to linger on those anticipated hours of rapture when matured affection should bestow its last best blessings ; but those hours had fled on to the goal of time, and had not shed from their wings as they flew the golden promise of

176

THE NOVICE OF

her sanguine hopes. Resigned rather than happy, her life passed on in a passive series of sober satisfaction, unillumined by those meteors of blissful emotion which were wont to hash athwart her heart, and a waken its pulse even to the wild throb of felicitous delirium, and unmellowed by those tender emotions she was so calculated to feel and to inspire.

Meantime the life of the count de St. Dorval seemed gradually to wear away with an almost'imperceptible decline. The blue skies and genial gales of Italy had failed in their promised effects, and the vital tide of existence ebbed faintly in his exhausted veins. The tender, the afflicted, heart of his child had long turned traitor to her wishes, and deceived them into a belief which melancholy conviction hourly dissipated ; but, at the expiration often months from the period of their arrival in Italy, the approaching dissolution of the count was obvious even to the heart of Imogen. Many a tear fell in secret from her eye, and many

ST. DOMINICK.

ITT

a sigh died unperceived on her lip, while with almost health-bestowing smiles and unwaried solicitude she hung over the couch of parental dissolution. The count for some time continued to linger in that state of gentle decline which neither confined him to his apartment nor suffered him to remain long from the repose his couch bestowed. The chevalier dc Sor-vi 11e_, who almost suffered pang for pang with Imogen, and whose life seemed to haug upon the slender' thread by which his friend's was suspended, one morning, that the count appeared something less weak and oppressed than usual, set out on business to Florence. In taking leave of Imogen there was a visible emotion in his air, his manner, that caught her observation and awakened her surprise. Heraised not the hand presented to him, as he was wont, to his lips, and his eyes avoided the cordial look that sought his, as if the basilisk’s spell lurked in their beam.

[[ We shall see you soon, dear cheva-h 2

THE NOVICE OF

“ lier?” said Imogen with an affectionate smile.

cc I am not the master of my own des-tiny,” was his reply ; and he gently loosed his hand from the grasp of hers, mounted his horse, and rode away.

Imogen pursued his receding form with her eyes till it was lost in distance, then heaved an unconscious sigh, and went to her father’s apartment. The count was reading in his arm-chair.

I hope, my dear sir,” said Imogen, seating herself by him and taking his hand, “ the chevalier will soon return. It is “ wonderful how necessary to the happi-ff ness of our existence is the society of those we love, and are habituated hourly to see and to hear.”

The count flung the book from him, and, with looks of peculiar elation and delight, exclaimed:	fr	Imogen,	this	is	the sub-

ff ject I longed most to speak of to you. *'f ’Tis you who have banished the cheva-lier de Sorville from the villa de Fiora.”

ST. DOMINICK.

179

"My lord, I!”

" My beloved, give me for a moment " thy patient attention. It is my heart’s-“ sweetest consolation that in leaving you <c in a world to which you are so new, for C£ which you are so little calculated, with “ all those tender ardent feelings glowing tC at thy unsophisticated heart, I shall leave “ thee to the joint guardianship of the u most amiable of women, the most vir-f( tuous of men. Need I name the duchess-tc de Guise and the chevalier de Sorville ? <£ In that brilliant sphere of polished life “ where your rank will destine you to “ move, where your accomplishments, <c your talents, will enable you to glitter “ a star of no-inferior magnitude, let the

duchess de Guise be the orb around 16 whose attractive influence you may re-<c volve without the fear of being hurried a away in the vortex of pleasure. Bufc <c the chevalier dc Sorville—O my sweet u child! look up to him as the pillar of u integrity, of virtue, of honour, on-which

THE NOVICE OF

thou mayst repose thy timid and inex-“ perienced bosom, as the friend., the com-Ct panion, the husband, of thy future life.” A paleness that might rival the livid hue of death bleached the cheek of Imogen, then suddenly gave place to a blush of crimson dye ; her hand trembled in her father’s grasps and her eyes, fixed on the earth, strove to conceal the confusion and surprise that lurked in them from his eager gaze. The count observed her emotion, and, construing it as the blushing effects of discovered passion, continued :	I	have

(t long with secret triumph observed the “ lively sensibility which the chevalier has xt betrayed to the perfections of my sweet ct child—long observed the reciprocity of 61 tenderness and esteem which, under the “ veil of friendship, has mutually stolen into i( your bosoms ; and the most perfect, the “ most refined sympathy forming the basis “ of a fervent and unalterable attachment, “ which, exempt from the wild storms of “ passion, unembittered by doubt, unop-

ST. DOMINICK.

1SI

“ posed by fortune, sanctioned by pru-u dence, and approved by reason and vir-<c tue, promises a long series of felicitous cc years, a permanency of happiness which <c death only can destroy. It was always <c the darling wish of mv heart to have a <c daughter worthy of this eminently-vir-“ tuous man, with whom I could bestow “ on him that property, the greater part cc of which I owe to his generous resigna-

O	O

“ tion in my favour. Heaven has accom-“ plished the wish of my heart, and Imo-u gen has become the agent of heaven's ci mercies to her father.”

The count paused, and Imogen, overwhelmed by the varying conflict of her feelings, hid her face in his bosom and wept. The count, kissing from her cheek what he believed to be drops ofplenteous “joy," added:	Compose thyself, my

<< beloved girl, for thou hast nothing to iC fear. I have had this morning a long “ conversation with the chevalier, who, “ with all that humility which is the con-

IS*

THE NOVICE OF

“ stant attribute of super-eminent merit, u dares not credit the belief of having’ “ awakened a tenderer sentiment in your bosom than what friendship might in-“ spire; and. with the self-denial of an cr ever-wakeful reason, has refused to listen “ to me on the subject until I had first ec breathed it to you. With a delicacy cc which you will understand and feel, he tc has gone to Florence, until a mandate from your hand recalls him. O my (t darling child ! this silence, these tears, “ these blushes, are the sweet confirma-<c tion of my dearest and long-cherished hopes ; and, whatever were the sufifer-ings, the trials, of my past life, this mo-ment, this blessed moment, overpays them all/'

The count strained to his bosom the almost-lifeless form of his daughter, and tears which fell from the pure source of parental bliss dimmed his eye, and concealed from his view the conflicting feelings painted in the half-averted countenance o£

ST. DOMINICK.

IS 3

the object of his heart's solicitude. Released from the embrace of her deceived and happy father, Imogen covered her face with her handkerchief, and hurried out of the room. This inartificial equivoque of appearance confirmed the fond suspicion of the count’s long-secret wishes, and obtained for the amazed and agitated Imogen time for self-collection. She mechanically wandered towards the portico, and, throwing lier-elf on a seat beneath the shadow of its Parian canopy, she gave a loose to those new and overwhelming emotions the subject of her father’s conversation had awakened. Neither the ardent affection which bound her by the strongest ties of consanguinity and sympathy to her amiable parent, nor the enthusiastic fondness for his mild and attractive character which grew in her bosom with hourly increase, could blunt or soften that penetrating observation which she intuitively possessed, and which betrayed to her view in the character of her father a

m

THE NOVICE OF

sanguine and romantic cast which neither time nor experience had subdued, and an impetuous ardor of temperament that tinted with the colouring of certainty the faint and irregular sketches of every visionary wish, of every baseless hope.

Imogen was not free from vanity, but vanity itself could not construe the attention of the chevalier into a warmer sentiment than what the solicitude of an anxious friend might authorize ; and so entirely had she ranked him on the same scale of affectionate regard as that her father occupied, that, with a thrill of indescribable emotion and repugnance, she shrunk from considering him as a lover whom she had hitherto regarded as a parent. From this uneasy and distressing idea she took shelter in the belief that the phantom which shocked her imagination was but the illusion of her father’s ardent wishes and sanguine hopes. But from these wishes, these hopes, whither could she fly ? To chill the glow that warmed the retreating stream of

ST. DOMINICK.

1S5

life in each exhausted vein, to extinguish the spark of hope that fed the decaying ilame of fading existence, to cloud the golden beam which flashed on the last sad hours of an expiring father, and still the pulse which palpitated a rapturous throb in the broken heart of a doating, dying, only, parent :—

“ God forbid !” she exclaimed; <c oh “ ho ! never shalt thou look upon thy ff child as the instrument of heaven’s re-“ tribution for that one act of filial dis-“ obedience, for which thy life lias been one unvaried scene of expiation. No, “ beloved father! be still deceived, and still enjoy the transient happiness thy “ fond delusive wishes have conferred.” Imogen sighed heavily and wept with bitterness, but still they were tears that cs delight and sighs that waft to heaven;” for sweet are the tears of virtuous resignation in the first moment of reason’s triumph over passion, and grateful the sigh which breathes from the heart that has subdued

THE NOVICE OF

its own wishes to promote the felicity of another. Imogen was still lost in reverie when two of the domestics, with horror and consternation in their countenances, summoned her to her father’s apartment. She had not power to inquire into the cause of this emotion : her fears were eloquent but dreadful interpreters. The count had not parted with his daughter half-an-hour when he was seized with an apoplectic fit, and when she reached his apartment she found him supported in the arms of his esquire, almost speechless, his features distorted, and every limb convulsed. Imogen, almost lifeless, had still presence of mind to send otf instantly for medical assistance ; and the count, laid on his couch, his head supported on the bosom of his weeping child, gave the first intimation of returning reason by pronouncing (though inarticulately) her name. She answered in the cordial endearing accent of fond and filial tenderness, and when the physicians arrived they found the count

ST. DOMINICK.

1ST

composed, though faint and exhausted.— During the remainder of the day Imogen left not fora moment his pillow, requiring of the physicians an attendance equally assiduous, while to her softly-breathed and anxious inquiries they returned no consolatory reply to soothe the apprehension of her afflicted heart. The count took what was offered him, but appeared either unable or disinclined to speak. From his bed-side, and at his request, Imogen dispatched a billet to require the chevalier’s return, and towards evening he appeared something better, and, in a voice perfectly articulate, expressed a wish that his director (a friar in a neighbouring conventj might attend. At this request Imogen could no longer repress her emotion, and, falling on her father’s pillow, wet it with the tears of a breaking heart. With that deceptive strength which generally precedes dissolution, the count raised himself on the couch, and, drawing his daughter towards him, said, in an articulate voice.

ISS

THE NOVICE OF

and with an air of cheerful resignation, rf Grateful to the soul of a parent is the “ tear of filial tenderness which falls from the heart of his child; but, when it “ streams from (he source of unavailing fc yet agonizing sensibility, his own weeps €t tears of blood. Thou canst not have “ deceived thvself with hopes which pos-sibility rejected. To that which is in-“ evitable be resigned; indulge the feel-tl ings of humanity, for by him who is “ all love were they given to thee ; but <c strengthen them with the efforts of thy cc reason, for to that purpose was it be-“ stowed on thee by him who is all wise.” Imogen dried her tears, and faintly smiled assurance to his wishes; but her smile was the eloquence of anguish suppressed, not subdued. The count folded her to his bosom, then throwing himself from the couch knelt beside her; her hands were folded in his, his eyes with hers were raised to heaven ; the prayer of the father’s soul quivered in silence on his

ST. DOMINICK.

189

lips, the supplication of the child's heart irradiated her countenance; their mingling souls seemed to float on a mutual sigh of religious rapture that ascended as incense to heaven. “Bless my child !” was the parent’s benediction ; “ Save my father!” was the daughter’s prayer: then, falling into each other’s arms, their hearts seemed to catch a divine impulse from each other’s throb; the world disappeared, and the spirit of mortal resignation and eternal hope descended from heaven like a dove on their heads.

The hour was stealing on the eve of midnight; the director of the count, after a conference which lasted a considerable time, had been dismissed ; the physicians had retired to rest; the page, esquire, and nurse, in a low voice chatted together in the anti-chamber ; jand the ever-w akeful, ever-solicitous, Imogen still hovered round the couch of her father. Exhausted by his conference with the friar, the count had early in the night fallen into a profound

THE NOVICE OF

sleep, and the wish which Imogert felt to have him removed to his bed was counteracted by the fear of chasing the doubtful repose, which her hopes suggested might bear returning health upon its wing; for when does hope desert the heart where the fond solicitudes of apprehensive affection live ? With a step whose every fall was noiseless as the sigh of the noontide breeze, Imogen closed the door of the anti-chamber, lest the gossip murmurs of the attendants should awaken her sleeping parent ; then, drawing aside the curtain which skreened a glass-door that opened on a terrace, a broad mass of moon-light fell on her father’s face ; a burning hectic glowf-ed on his cheek, the apartment was close, the night hot and oppressive ; she gently opened the door, and, leaving it something more than half-closed, walked down the terrace, in the hope that the air would refresh her spirits and dissipate the painful throb that beat on her temples. She knew the watchful care of the count’s attendants.

ST. DOMINICK.

191

and she wished to indemnify herself for the fatigue she should undergo in sitting up during the remainder of the night by the relaxation of a walk. The air was breathless, the atmosphere clear, blue, and unclouded, the moon unveiled even by a vapour ; at a distance the murmurs of a cascade stole on the soft empire of silence, but so faint that the echo of the surrounding hills gave not existence to the sound. Imogen, descending the marble steps of the terrace, glided on towards a grove of pines, whose spiry tops were silvered with the slanting moon-beam, and which arose like an amphitheatre behind the villa towards the sum mit of an overhanging mountain. It was the grove in which Imogen had been torn from her nurse's arms, and she entered its sombre recesses filled with those solemn and profound emotions the anxiety of her heart, the tone uf her mind, the awful stillness of the hour, and the pensive twilight gloom of the scenery, were calculated to inspire. It was a mo-

192

THE NOVICE OF

meet when feeling and reflection were equally alive, when the soul delights to rove unrestrained in the variety of its own cogitations, and when the world and all its splendid nothings recede from the eye of thought, and leave the unshackled mind to expand in the region of sublime contemplation. Filled with those ideas her father’s situation was calculated to inspire, the hopes of Imogen, brightening in the light of faith, pointed towards eternity, and she beheld herself, after a transient period of earthly probation, approach the regions of everlasting ^felicity, and rise a pure and disembodied spirit, re-united to the parents of her mortal affection, and mingling her soul with tears in the fruition of everlasting bliss. Dazzled with the splendid image of religious rapture, animated by the tender impression of human affection, the mental eye of Imogen reposed its gaze on the milder and less enthusiastic theme of reflection. She remembered the day w’hen the solicitude of

ST.DOMINICK.

m

affection was a stranger to her heart, when the sigh of sorrow breathed noton her lip, nor the tear of anxiety swelled to her eye ; when the tremulous vibrations of hope and doubt varied not her heart’s light pulse, and when nothing pained, for nothing touched her. Then the suspense, the agony, and struggles of her riper feelings and maturer bliss rushed to her memory: her voluntary resignation of the baron de Montargis, the anguish she had endured for her father’s doubtful fate at Laon, and the nature of those feelings with which she now contemplated the gradual but perceptible dissolution of her only parent: while, as she wept in the filial sorrow of her heart, she almost felt that the indifference of an unconnected existence, and the pang of awakened sensibility, are nearly brought to a level by the perspective good and evil attached to them.

Her thoughts then, by a natural but melancholy association of ideas, turned on the death of her mother, and at that ino-

VOL. III.	I

THE NOVICE OF

194

ment she heard a footstep echoing to her own. Wholly under the influence of a gloomy and agitated fancy, Imogen shuddered with horror, the ghastly countenance of Stephano appeared to her eye as she had last beheld it; and again she almost supposed herself in the power of such a ruffian as had before borne her away on the same spot; the next moment dissipated her fears, and the voice of the chevalier arrested her rapid pace.

“ Thank God, it is you, sir!” said Imogen, holding out her trembling hand to him : ff never was your presence more wel-" come, nor more wanting, than at this “ moment.’*

The chevalier held the hand presented to him to his lips, in uncontrolled emotion ; then gazed in silence on Imogen’s face, with an expression in his countenance and eyes, that instantly recalled to her mind her late conversation with her father, and the delicate situation in which she stood with the chevalier. Under the influ-

ST. DOMINICK.

195

ence of momentary feeling, she suddenly withdrew her hand from the grasp of his, and turned away her head to conceal those blushes the moon’s pale light could not have betrayed. The chevalier again took her withdrawn hand, held it firmly., looked earnestly in her face, and, in a voice no longer tremulous from agitation* said with pointed emphasis:

“ The letter which I received a few hours back, dictated by your father anti " written by yourself, is the cause of my ff immediate return from Florence; and at “ this moment there is but one sentiment “ buoyant in my mind, and that arises “ from the tender anxiety, the too-just “ apprehensions, of friendship only : in a fr moment such as this could I, ought I, to harbour another idea?”

In this speech, while it conveyed a tacit reproach to the heart of Imogen, she again beheld the chevalier, as she had hitherto always perceived him, the most virtuous, the most reasonable, the most elevated of

THE NOVICE OF

human beings; and, catching the assurance of her own manner from the firmness of his, she asked him, as they walked on, if he had seen the count?

“ No,” he replied; “ the attendants said he had slept for some hours, and had not “ yet awakened. Supposing you were, as usually, occupied in hovering round his “ coach, 1 made no inquiries for you, and oppressed with heat, from the rapidity “ with which I rode, and the stillness of the “ night, I walked out to enjoy the cool “ freshness which these shades bestow, and, “ with some surprise, beheld a female form gliding before me at a distance ; I foi-“ lowed, nor was my amazement lessened “ lo find that form was Imogen’s/'

Imogen accounted for her having left her father’s room, and confessed, that a train of melancholy, but not uninteresting reflections, had beguiled the time, and ideally shortened the length of her ramble. She then proposed returning to the house, and they struck into a cross path, that led

ST. DOMINICK.

197

to it by a shorter direction, when an abrupt opening in the trees discovered to the eye the mausoleum of the countess de St. Dorval. The softened glances of night's mild luminary shed a solemn light on the cypress which drooped round it, and were reflected back from the snowy surface of the shaft of the monument, which arose from a broad base of black marble ; while the deepening shades, which formed the back ground, gave a gloomy and awful effect to the solemnity of the whole. The chevalier drew the arm of Imogen through his, and attempted to lead her away, but she appeared transfixed to the spot ; then, with a profound sigh, she turned her eyes on the chevalier in a supplicatory glance : they were full of tears, and with a gentle violence she led him towards the monument of her mother. Filled with those emotions the hour, the scene, the object, of their contemplation were calculated to inspire, the friend, the child, of the countess de St. Dorval approached the spot sa-

198

THE NOVICE OF

creel to lier memory. Imogen, withdrawing her arm from that of the chevalier, advanced to the steps of the monument, when she perceived a tall human figure wrapped in dark drapery kneeling at its base. At her wild exclamation of horror and amazement, the chevalier sprang forward, and the figure attempted to rise, but fell prostrate to the earth ; the chevalier raised the almost-visionary form in his arms, and as the moon-beam fell on the face of his nearly-lifeless burthen, Imogen and the chevalier beheld the countenance of the count de St. Dorval. Amazement for a moment absorbed every other sentiment, but it soon gave way to solicitude and apprehension. Imogen hung over him in speechless emotion, while the chevalier endeavoured to recover him from the faintness in which he lay.

My father, my dear father !” sobbed Imogen, bathing his hands with her tears, “ will you not speak to me ?”

At the sound of her voice the count

ST. DOMINICK.

199

opened his eyes, and, casting’ their glances toward heaven., exclaimed in a faint voice> “Julia, thou art heard! I come.”

“ Alas!” said Imogen, “ do you not “ know your child ?”

te My child !” repeated the count, “ my “ child I” then, looking earnestly and alternately at the chevalier and Imogen, he exclaimed : “ My child ! my friend ! yes, “ yes, now, now I revive; now to die, is “ to die most blest—at the shrine of my “ love, in the arms of my child, of my “ friend. It is now almost all over—Imo-“ gen ! de Sorville !”

With an effort of strength he endeavoured to rise, while the arms of his daughter and his friend supported him. He tottered towards the base of the monument, then knelt on the second step, Imogen and the chevalier kneeling on cither side. The moon, as it fell on the wrapt countenance of St. Dorval, touched it with an expression more than human. Ilis eyes were raised to heaven, and while his lips qui-

TUE NOVICE OF

vered in silence, his soul appeared to hold communion with his God. Then looking alternately at Imogen and de Sorville, he smiled with the benignity of a saint and the tenderness of a father; and, taking a hand of either, he united and pressed them in his own, and, wetting them with the last tear that fell from his mortal eye, endeavoured to speak, but the words died on his lips. He bent his head over their clasped hands, and seemed to implore a blessing on their union : then raised his eyes toheaven. A lambent flame played in their glance, his countenance was illumined with its light; he stretched his hands forward, and raised his almost-impalpable figure from its recumbent posture : like the prophet Isaiah, he seemed gradually to drop the veil of immortality, and steal from earth to heaven. Without a sigh, without a struggle, his whole form pointing to the gaol of his impatient desires, his spirit fled to that source of light of which it was an emanation ; his mortal remains dropt in the embrace of his child and his friend.

ST. DOMINICK.

201

From the visionary dreams of an elated fancy and debilitated mind, the count had been awakened by his daughter opening the door of his apartment; in the dream of his rest he had seen his Julia; her form still glowed on his awakening thought* and he wished to visit the shrine of his love, before that moment when even love itself should be no more.

Wrapt in a loose robe, with the renovated strength which is so frequently the precursor of death, and supported by a staff, he crept towards the monument of his wife, only to expire at its base ; the victim of refined natural feelings, wrought up by a romantic indulgence to an exquisite and fatal sensibility, which, becoming progressively acute, was finally incapacitated from sustaining the least of those ‘ rough brakes which Virtue must en-dure,” and from which human nature* even in its most perfect state, is not exempt.

i 2

202

THE NOVICE OF

CHAP. XXV.

Here is my hand.

You shall he as a father to my youth :

My voice shall sound as you do prompt mine ear; Aud I will stoop, and humble iny intents To your well-practised wise directions.

Shakespeare.

THE grey beam of returning twilight trembled on the waves of the Arno, and bathed its pale light in the dewy bosoms of those rich flowerets which shed their aromatic influence along its delighted shores; the morning breeze crept on the undula-ing bosom of the river, and sighed away its existence among the foliage of the surrounding trees : the last star of night glittered above the broken line of mist that arose from the summit of the hills; and the effusive glow of day, as it shed its strengthcninglightover the kindling firmament, rolled in columns of crimson and

ST. DOMINICK.

203

gold along the eastern horizon, and ushered in the great visible agent of light and life. All nature smiled ; but keen is the pang of the orphan’s heart, when, after the transient reprieve of momentary repose, sleep flies its tear-dewed pillow, and it awakens to the consciousness of its great and recent loss; when, after a temporary suspension to its filial woes, it remembers that with the last day’s dewy sun-rise it had a parent, but that that day shall return no more.

On the night of her father’s decease, the orphan daughter of St. Dorval had wept herself to sleep ; but short and broken was her repose, and inanguished was the awakening thought which put it to flight. She arose with the morning dawn from her restless couch, and, throwing open the window of her apartment, flung her tearful glance on the unfolding beauties of awakened creation. “ Man alone,” sighed she, sleeps to wake no more ! Author of “ my being, with whom but yesterday I

204

THE NOVICE OF

“ gazed upon this glowing scene; whose “ soul sublimated in the contemplation of c< those heaven-embosomed mountains, in what unknown unguessed-at regions of <( beatitude does thy spirit now wander; ff or dost thou still, with the lingering ci fondness of mortal love, hover round ff thy child? Behold her tears, and shed “ thy sainted pity on her sorrows/*

When the body of the count de St. Dorval had been deposited in the tomb where mouldered the remains of his wife, the chevalier de Sorville, in the presence of the young lady de St. Dorval, a notary, and the late count’s principal agent, took the seal off his lordship’s will, and gave it to the notary to read aloud. The will, which he had seen made only one day before his death, contained but a few words : the whole of his large hereditary and personal estates he bequeathed to his daughter, on the condition of her union with the chevalier dc Sorville ; but in case that union should not take place, of which he

ST. DOMINICK.

205

confessed he saw no human probability, he bequeathed his property to be equally divided between them, appointing the chevalier his sole executor, and guardian to his daughter, until that title should be superseded by a husband’s claims. In the codicil several legacies were bequeathed to his servants, a large sum to the convent of St. Dominick, of Picardy in France, and another to the friary in the neighbourhood of Fiora. He also added a few tender and affecting lines to his daughter, expressive of the happiness her future union with the friend of his heart would shed over his last hours of life; and intimating a wish that she would continue for four months after his death at the villa de Fiora; that her residence in Paris 'should never exceed three ; and that she would chiefly reside at the chateau de St. Dorval, conducing to the happiness and comforts of her tenantry and vassals, promoting virtue by her example, and encouraging industry by her countenance and reward.

206

TH K NOVICE OF

When the perusal of the count de St. Dorval’s last testament was finished, Imogen, no longer able to suppress or conceal lier emotion, retired ; and the chevalier.

not less agitated, though more successful

0^0

in concealing it, remained for some time with the agent and notary. A flection for the only parent she had ever known had hitherto superseded every sentiment in her mind; and the chevalier’s respect for the sacred sorrow of a child, had left her wholly to their private indulgence: but now a sense of the relative situation in which she stood with the chevalier de Sor-ville rushed on her mind; in the present moment her guardian, the representative of her deceased parent—at a future period the husband and companion of her life.

fC Oh 1 my too-sanguine and deceived “ parent," exclaimed Imogen, ff why did thy warm and tender heart ever take the ff lead of thy judgment! O de Sorville! “ how trying, how delicate, is the situa-“ tion in which yve mutually stand to each

ST. DOMINICK.

207

" other ! Thee I must not, dare not reject, “and me thou wilt not; for thou hast “ been taught to believe that heart is thine, “ which still faintly throbs with the ling-€t ering passion another has inspired; a “ heart which, were it free, could offer cc thee only the homage of its reverence rt and respect. And, (hough thine own rs beats but with (he temperate pulse of “ friendship for thy ward, (he hand which “ last inclosed hers in thine, and hallowed “ this union with tears scarcely mortal, “ has riveted our mutual destinies in a “ chain no human power must or can dis-iC solve. Sacred be the wish of my dying “ father’s heart, breathed for his child’s cc felicity at (he shrine of a sainted mother,

“ witnessed by attending angels, and re-“ gistered in heaven ; for sure that wish,

“ fond wish, ascended with thy pure eman-ef cipated spirit to thy kindred skies.

During the remainder of the day Imogen left not her apartment, nor did the chevalier send to request her company

20S

THE NOVICE OF

either at dinner or supper; and the next morning, at an early hour, Beatrice delivered the following billet :

To the Lady de St. Dorval.

cc A man of the world would felicitate you on your accession to a title so ancient, so noble, as that by which I have the honour to address to you ; but I know it will be more grateful to your heart, when, in the honest sincerity of mine, J confess to you, that the hour which made you its possessor, and the great acquisitions attached to it, was one of the most melancholy and most unhappy of my life. To this plain but true avowal, suffer me to add a prayer, that you may prove as worthy of the noble name of St. Dorval, as him from whom you have received it. Inclosed I send you a letter, written by your father to the duchess de Guise, which at a future period will serve as an introduction for you to that amiable and accomplished princess.

ST. DOMINICK.

209

Acquainted with the filial virtues of your heart, I have no doubt but the fondest wish of your father will meet your ready acquiescence. I am therefore to consider you as a resident at the villa de Fiora for the six ensuing months; not, however, as a guest, but as a mistress : it has been, madam, from time immemorial, in the possession of your ancestors ; it is now yours; but, as the too-fastidious decorum of the world requires the sanction of female guardianship, I have dispatched a courier to hasten my sister’s arrival, who will be happy to give you her society, as long as you may wish to possess it : for me, madam, considering myself in no other light but that in which you wish to consider me, I shall never forget the sacred trust reposed in me by my friend ; and, as the friend or guardian of his child, her happiness shall always constitute the chief object for which I desire to survive him who bequeathed her to my care. I shall, therefore, fix my residence at Florence during her residence



ST. DOMINICK.

211

pretensions, upon any condition or terms whatever, to the properly lineal or personal of the late count de St. Dorval, upon which I never had either hereditary, legal, or just, claim.

(Signed) De Soiiville.

Le Poyer, Notary.

De---------,	Agent.

To the mind of pure and elevated virtue, to the mind filled with enthusiastic homage for all that is great and generous, how dear, how grateful, is a conduct arising from corresponding principles in another! Every feeling of the soul of Imogen dilated as she perused this letter; the delicacy which breathed in every line was too consonant to the refinement of her heart not to awaken its reverence and admiration ; and the noble, the romantic generosity with which de Sorville relinquished every interested view, though it did not surprise, gave her that heart-felt satisfaction which we ever feel from an act of greatness of those we love and osteem. That

212

THE NOVICE OF

resignation which, indeed, would have been most grateful to her he had not made, the resignation of herself; but even here she traced the delicate refinementof his always-superior mind, for to voluntarily resign would be tacitly to reject. ff But has he not said,” she exclaimed, ff that he will never <( consider himself in any other light than “ that in which I wish to consider him ?” Always the sport of feeling and impulse, Imogen, having vainly endeavoured to realize her glowing and grateful emotions on paper, sent Beatrice to the chevalier with her compliments, and she begged to see him before his departure. The intermediate moments were past in restless but not unpleasing agitation ; she was still pacing her closet with a hurried step, and indulging the warm flush of her feelings, rather than arranging her scattered ideas, when de Sorville entered. Involved in a confusion the most bewitchingly touching, the tear swimming in her speaking eye, the srrrile playing round her quivering lip, her

ST. DOMINICK.

213

cheek alternately pale and flushed, trembling, agitated, Imogen advanced to meet him, pointed towards the letter, then placed her hands in his, and, turning away her head, wept in silence. The chevalier, scarcely less moved, less agitated, drew her toward a couch, and sat down by her, still holding her hands in his ; then, gazing earnestly at her, observing the paleness of her complexion, and the deep mourning of her habiliments, he pressed her hands to his bosom, and mingled his tears with hers.

“ I have no friend but you/* said Imogen affectingly, “ and yet you would leave “ me !”

The chevalier shook his head, but seemed either unable or unwilling to answer.

“ I thought to have answered your let-“ ter,” continued Imogen, “ but could “ not : let these tears speak for me and she raised the hand of the chevalier to her lips, and embalmed the kiss she imprest on it with a tear.

“Imogen! Imogen !” exclaimed the

214

THE NOVICE OF

chevalier passionately, “ spare me, in mcr-“ cy spare me. 1 cannot, indeed I cannot cc bear this : this is too much and he snatched his hand from the grasp of hers.

ft Then I must conceal my feelings/' said Imogen, " since the dignity of your <f elevated virtue disdains their acknow* ledgment/'

“ You see my conduct through an ex-“ aggerated medium,” said the chevalier ; “ in a cooler moment it will appear in a fC less-glowing aspect : but for the present <e we will wave the subject.”

A pause of a minute ensued, and Imogen, fancying she observed a restless impatience in the countenance and air of the chevalier, timidly said, “ I fear, sir, I in-te trudeon your time : I had, indeed, much “ to say, but you have imposed silence, “ and a wish of yours shall henceforth be unto me as a law.”

“ Imogen, my sweet friend, I must be-“ seech you not to speak thus. My wishes u your law ? oh ! no ; be it the sweet bu-

ST. DOM1KICK.	215

ff siucss of my life to anticipate and fulfil " yours.”

“ At least,” said Imogen, suffer me to thank you for the happiness 1 promise “ myself in the society of your sister, and “ for your considerate kindness in procu-“ ring me so estimable a friend ; but, when you speak of the decorum of the world <c requiring any otiier sanction to my resi-dence here than what your presence confers, I confess I do not understand you/*

Thy ignorance, my sweet young friend, is the wisdom of innocence and “ virtue. The heart which knows no guile, the mind to which simulation is “ a stranger, reposes in the consciousness of its own purity, nor ever suspects that the degenerate world judges not by facts, but by appearances.”

“ At least, my dear chevalier, when your “ sister becomes a resident here, I see no “ necessity for your removal to Florence.”

216

THE NOVICE OF

“ Dear chevalier !” repeated de Sorville smiling, with a look half-doubtful, half-del ighted.

“ Well then,” said Imogen blushing, " my dear guardian ; by that endearing “ sacred title shall I henceforth only ad-“ dress you.”

The chevalier’s looks of elation fled, and he vainly endeavoured to stifle a sigh. Imogen, struck with the sense he might wrench from this declaration, and shocked and surprised by the emotion it awakened, remained silent and confused ; but the chevalier was in a moment himself; he arose with dignity and respect, and coldly said : f< if you have any commands I can “ execute previous to my departure, you ee will have the goodness to mention them* ff for time presses, and my horses and at-ff tendants are in waiting/’

ff No,” said Imogen, grieved to the soul that she had in the hurry of her ideas let fall any expression that could give pain to the best and noblest heart, “ 1 have no



ST. DOMINICK.

217

" commands, except that you will return to me soon.’'

A sense of her solitary and desolate situation when the chevalier should have left her rushed on her mind, and she burst into tears. The chevalier, deeply affected, took both her hands, and pressed them affectionately, but remained silent.

“ I cannot indeed suffer you to depart," continued Imogen earnestly, rf until you “ promise me you will still consider this “ place as your own and me as your guest. “ You must, indeed you must, give up all “ idea of living in Florence ; or, if you have " any decided objection to live under the “ same roof with me, I will remove with “ madame de Rosemont to some villa in the

“ neighbourhood, and-------”

" Objection, Imogen ! God of heaven Î

“ if you knew the sacrifice----"

“ Consider, you are my only friend on “ earth ; I have now no father, and I feel “ as I did in the convent of St. Dominick

K

vol. hi.

THE NOVICE OP

“ when I thought myself disowned and re-u jected by the whole world.”

The chevalier turned aside his head, and concealed his face in hiscloke ; then with a forced smile said: “ You forget you are “ an heiress ; you forget the distinguished “ place you are destined to hold in society. “ Rank will always secure friends and for-“ tune purchase them.”

“ Indeed !” said Imogen, with a flash of her wonted naivete; “ then what is your “ price?”

“ Imogen ! Imogen ! ” exclaimed the chevalier,, “ spare me. You overpower, you u overwhelm me ; you know7 not what you « do.”

“ Promise me then you will continue at “ the villa de Fiora on your return from “ France. Gome, come, you must pro-“ mise,” she added, smiling through her tears, and placing one hand on his shoulder, iwhile, with a look of infatuating supplication, she added : “ Can you so soon

ST. DOMINICK.

219

“ resign your little pupil, yet confess your-“ self so proud of the progress she has made “ under your tuition ?”

I promise any thing, every thing,,, exclaimed the chevalier, agitated beyond all self-control, only let me now depart. rf You are my fate, my destiny ; but be-ware of deceiving me, beware of deceiv-“ ing yourself.”

With these words, expressively, emphatically pronounced,he rushed out of the room.

“Beware of deceiving you, beware of “ deceiving myself !” repeated Imogen three times successively; then, seating herself on the couch, she endeavoured to solve

the enigma which lurked in this caution. ©

She recalled to mind all that passed in their late brief but interesting interview, and the purport of the chevalier's departing expression flashed on her apprehension Her reception of him in that unguarded moment when all her awakened feelings flushed thick about her; when gratitude.

220

THE NOVICE OF

esteem, and admiration for his virtues, his attachment to herself, and his elevated generous conduct, struggled for preeminence in her heart, and shed that glow over her manners and conversation which might have left it a doubt to the most penetrating mind whether she was not influenced by a sentiment of a warmer, more tender, and less disinterested, nature than that by which she had been governed ; and this circumstance, clashing with the assurance he had received from her father, formed so striking a coincidence, that she now felt herself the unconscious accessary to an illusion it was every way her interest and her wish to dissipate.

“ Yes,” said she, “ the chevalier must “ believe himself beloved ; and the lover “ of the superior, the all-intelligent Ro-“ salie de Vilette, still enamoured even of “ her memory, will marry, from compas-“ sion, the thoughtless inexperienced Imo-“ gen de St. Dorval.”

Her pride, her delicacy, shrunk from the

ST. DOMINICK.

221

humiliating* conviction. On the impulse of the moment she was on the point of following de Sorville, and unfolding to him every feeling every sentiment of her heart, but at that instant she beheld him gallop down the avenue; and, again restored to the influence of judgment and reason, she felt the indelicacy as well as the inefficacy of the step she was so near adopting; and, restored wholly to herself,she lamented that he.r principles were rather the effusions of her feelings than the offspring of her reason ; and that, in cultivating her talents and her mind, she had neglected that cold dispassionate consideration of right and wrong which not only in its individual but abstract and invariable effects would have enabled her to lay down a line of conduct, and to form a system of principle which the meteors emanated from the ardor of burning feelings could not dazzle, nor the ebb and flow of passion’s impetuous tide could not overwhelm nor efface.

222

THE NOVICE OF

CHAP. XXVI.

Son ame au-dessus des vulgaires,

Dédaignoit de l’amour la conduite ordinaire.

Corneille.

Of friendship’s fairest fruits, the frùit most fair Is virtue, kindling at a rival fire.

And emulously rapid in her race.

Young.

IN the absence of her guardian, Imogen received no visitors, though many visits of condolence and congratulation were paid her by the neighbouring nobility. Her harp lay neglected, her masters were dismissed, her mind was too-deeply affected to apply for relief to books, and the only means she took to dissipate the gloom which solitude and the pensive tone of her mind shed around her was that which humanity, under the influence of her own existing feelings, suggested. She planned

ST. DOMINICK.

2%3

the endowment of an asylum for orphans, and busied herself in seeking for objects worthy to partake of its sanction and benefits. At the expiration of a fortnight the chevalier returned to the villa de Fiora, accompanied by his sister, that madame de Rosemont, whose house was to have afforded to the fugitive and unfriended Imogen such a shelter as she was now planning for the reception of others similarly and unfortunately situated. Under the power of emotions arising from the recollection of this circumstance, Imogenr rushed to the arms of her once-intended patroness, the friend of Pasiphae, the sister of de Sorville. The artless unsophisticated child of nature, unrestrained by the world’s cold forms of etiquette, shed tears on the bosom of a stranger, nor, in the vivacity of her own ardent feelings, perceived that the heart she pressed to hers beat not with the throb of corresponding emotion. The lady de Rosemont, acquainted with every circumstance of the former and late event-

224

THE NOVICE OF

fui life of Imogen, received her caresses with pleased astonishment, and gazed at her with less interest than curiosity.

The friendship which had subsisted for so many years between the minor canoness of St. Dominick and the lady de Rosemont was a striking proof that love, operating like a magic spell, communicates an illusive property to the nature of every object within its sphere. Madame de Rosemont was beloved by Rosalie de Valette because she was the sister of the man she adored; because she could furnish the enamoured, the craving heart of his mistress with a thousand touching anecdotes in her brother’s conduct, a thousand amiable traits in his character, that sanctified the love he had inspired. And who that has loved under such circumstances has not tolerated the prolixity of dulness, and the fr twice-told tale” of prosing stupidity ? for to speak of those we love is the magic art to win the soul’s delighted attention, even when the judgment and the taste re-

ST. DOMINICK.

225

fuse their sanction. Never were two minds organized upon principles more dissimilar than those of de Sorville’s sister and his mistress. The strong nervous intellect, the tender glowing heart, the vehement and impassioned disposition of Rosalie, was finely contrasted by the weak but obstinate mind, the phlegmatic temperament, and apathetic character of her friend. Madame de Rosemont in her early life had been in the service of queen Margaret de Valois, the beautiful but deserted wife of Henry the Fourth. She was then a bigoted catholic ; she married a hugonot gentleman, and became a rigid protestant. Too indolent to examine into the nature either of her moral or religious faith, she took up her opinion on the recommendation of others, and blindly defended what she had blindly embraced. Rich, independent, and well connected, she was exempt from all the evils of life, and insensible to its best pleasures. Indolence was her enjoyment, and to be surrounded k 2

226

THE NOVICE OF

by those whose dépendance on her bounty rendered them unopposing to her opinion and her wish, formed her ultimate idea of society. Cold in her manner, even in her temper, and blameless in her conduct, she glided through life tolerated rather than admired, and was precisely the character on which envy never turned a malignant glance, nor scandal tainted with its pestilential breath. In compliance with her brother's repeated and pressing invitations she arrived at the villa de Fiora without any desire to visit Italy or any wish to remain in France. The chevalier de Sor-ville loved his sister with the affection of a brother, but not with the sympathy of a friend j and though deeply aware of the great, the striking, the heaven -formed disparity of the character of his sister and his ward, this very disparity was the strongest inducement to bind them in the bond of close association. Believing that whatever is constantly within the sphere of our perception will communicate some-

ST. DOMINICK.

227

thing of its property to our nature, and receive from us an equivalent, he hoped that the methodical manners, the phlegmatic temper, and moderated feelings of his sister, would operate by the influence of constant example on the lively passions, ardent sensibility, and sanguine disposition of Imogen; while from his ward’s genius he hoped his sister would steal an emanation to illumine the languor of a mind, perhaps passive and inactive as much from habit as from nature.

Prepared to love, to esteem, to admire,' the sister of de Sorville, the friend of Pa-siphae,—one week dissipated the illusion of expectation, and, a natural mental physiognomist, the mind and character of madame de Rosemont stood unveiled to the disappointed eye of Imogen. Restrained by her presence, she rather interrupted the mild and pensive enjoyments of solitude than bestowed the pleasure of so* ciety, and Imogen vainly endeavoured to converse with one between whom and her-

228

THE NOVICE OF

self there existed no reciprocity of sentiment, no sympathy of feeling, no community of idea. Such was the nature of her connexion with the sister, while with the brother her situation hourly became more delicate, more awkward, and more distressing. The chevalier seemed to have given up all thought of residing at Florence, and to have laid aside with the intention of a too-fastidious prudence the rigid manners and dictatorial air which had accompanied it. Even the parental familiarity with which he had formerly treated his pupil, with which he reproved her errors or applauded her perfections, had now given way to a delicate but obvious reserve» a polite and assiduous attention, which, if it wore not the air of love or gallantry, possessed nothing of the aspect of indifference.

Imogen, still impressed with the sentiments which arose from hei interview with de Sorville, met him on his return from France with blushing confusion; and.

ST. DOMINICK.

229

struck with the change in his air and manner,, believed her suspicions were founded in fact, and that the chevalier, supposing himself beloved, was endeavouring to return the passion he had awakened.

New to every species of dissimulation, Imogen could not conceal the repugnance, the uneasiness, this idea gave birth to ; and though she had never formed a thought of frustrating the intentions of her father by refusing the hand of his friend should he offer it, she was yet acting unconsciously upon a principle which would eventually put an insuperable bar to every hope of a union between herself and the chevalier.

Not only from impulse but from premeditation she now avoided the presence of one whose society had once been so necessary to her happiness. If he addressed her, her answers were brief and cold ; if he found her alone shearose, and, under some feigned pretence, left the apartment ; if he solicited her to continue her English and Italian studiçs, she pleaded engagements

THE NOVICE OF

with her professional masters (who were now all re-called ;) and when not engaged with madame do Rosemoi.t * ema:ned shut up for hours in her own apartment with her books and her harp. The change in the chevalier’s conduct at last left her no plea for the apparent singularity of her own, for reserve and distance became its only character. They now seldom met but at meals, and never exchanged words but in general conversation with madame de Rosemont and the few and select visitors who enlarged the family circle of the villa.

A month had elapsed since the chevalier had returned to the villa de Fiora, when one morning, as Imogen was engaged with her music-master, he entered the apartment and took up a book, while Imogen continued her lesson on the harp. In a short time the professor, with many flattering encomiums on her musical progress, withdrew. Confused, yet anxious to appear collected, Imogen modulated on the

ST. DOMINICK.

231

strings of the instrument, and endeavoured to hum the air she had been practising, but her finger was unsteady and her voice tremulous. The chevalier laid down the book, gazed on her for a moment in silence, then, rising and seating himself by her, he gently drew her hands from the harp, and with a faint smile said:	Will

you so far overcome repugnance as to “ honour me with a few minutes' confer-/f ence ? It may perhaps save you some fc future hours of unfounded misery, and <f may conduce to the termination of those “ I have already endured.”

Unable to reply, yet touched to the heart by the melancholy, the tenderness, with which these few words were pronounced, Imogen bowed her head in acquiescence to his request. A pause of considerable and distressing length ensued : the soul of de Sorville seemed to “ fall into itself;’’ then, after pacing the room for a minute, he again seated himself by Imogen and began :

“ Twenty years back I entered life with

222

THE NOVICE OF

s< a heart as warm, feelings as irritable, af-(t fections as glowing, and ideas as chime-u rical in their expectations, as you now “ possess. Young, ardent, unguarded, with-te out a friend to direct, a guardian to save me, I was thrown upon the world ; I was u thrown among the vicious, the crafty, the i( unprincipled, and the designing. My “ experience was briefly but dreadfully “ bought; my affections became the sport <f of the cunning, my feelings the scorn of “ the phlegmatic, and my credulity the " victim of the designing. Heaven, in “ bestowing on me such dangerous gifts, “ gave equilibrium to the balance in en-“ dovving me with a strong mind ; that “ was my saviour from perdition. Ktiined by the wiles of a mercenary passion, be-“ trayed by friends, and deceived by as-“ sociates, with my little wreck of fortune “ and of virtue, at the age of two-and-“ twenty I fled from the world to the “ dear shades of my youth and my happi-u riess. At this period a circumstance

ST. DOMINICK.

235

ff took place, which shed the predominant ff hue on all the lights and shades of my " after life. 1 loved—for the first time I tc loved. The object of my passion was not “ only beautiful and virtuous; she was a “ woman of mind, of genius—she wasUo-“ salie de Vilette, the minor canoness of “ St. Dominick. Brought up in all the “ rigid bigotries of superstition, the fire of (f her soul shed a light upon the gloomy iC page of fanaticism, and discovered its <f characters traced in blood. From the lip of love I imbibed the essence of re-" ligion ; and the object of my earthly “ homage, like a seraph directing an (t emancipated spirit in its flight to heaven, “ led me to the bosom of my heavenly “ Father by the luminous path of truth. “ Mild was the beam that illumined my * path, and soothing the sounds that lured “ me on the way. Hope and faith glanced on my uplifted eye, and peace, charity, and love, breathed on my ear. Such “ was the simple but deep-laid system of

THE NOVICE OF

“ my orthodoxy. The sequel of my noble* “ my pure, bût unfortunate* love you are “ acquainted with. The brother, the fa-*'■ ther, of Rosalie, bigoted, cruel, and “ ambitious, deemed the illumination of “ her mind the deceptive glare of heresy; “ and, to enrich the male branch of the ff family, tore herefrom the bosom they €t had stabbed in a moment of fanatic “ frenzy, and buried her in a convent for « life.

“ For ten years passion survived hope, <f possibility, and reason ; then the varia-<c bility of all human affections, when de-“ serted by their object, began to prevail ; ec and the ardor of love moderated into a tender, melancholy, and grateful, re-(e collection of that sentiment which once C( filled and occupied my whole soul.— Without a family, without connections, 44 without a home, without plan or object m view, I pursued a life wandering and <c unsettled. Dreading the world, I con-“ cealed from its ridicule the still ardent

ST. DOMINICK.

23b

“ feelings of my soul beneath an assumed u phlegmatic character. Loving mankind “ with a more than brotherly affection, I “ assisted it to the best of my moderate " abilities, while I carefully concealed the " tender, the warm affections which *' prompted my endeavours.”

Here the chevalier paused ; then, after a moment’s silence, continued:

“ He who once in his life has acknow-“ ledged the power of woman’s mind> of u woman’s genius, superior even to her u personal attraction ; who has found in the object of his love the idol of his re-tc verence, his esteem, his admiration, and “ who loses this object, can only judge “ how difficult it is to teach the heart to “ offer its homage at the shrine of inferior “ excellence. When the glowing affec-tf tions of my heart panted for an object “ to engross their tender sensibilities, I " said, ‘ When thou shalt again find one rt who possesses the virtue, the mind, the <e genius, and the graces, of the idol of

236

THE NOVICE OF

ie thy first homage, then shaft thou love/ <f Many a year fled on, but no sentiment “ succeeded the tender recollection of Ro* “ salie de Vilette ; yet the hour came when tc I said, f Now thou mayst love, for now ff thou hast found another Rosalie/ ”

The chevalier paused; the sanguine beam of passion illumined his eye, the rich colouring of vehement emotion glowed on his cheek; and, throwing himself at the feet of Imogen, he exclaimed: “ O u thou ! for whom it was reserved to awa-“ ken the long-stilled pulse of love in a <f heart long dead to passion’s melting “influence; whose innocence and love-ct liness warmed admiration into tender-“ ness, and whose mind and genius ele-“ vated tenderness to esteem, to love ; “ pupil of my care, sister of my heart, tf companion of my mind, daughter of St. “ Dorval, by all these endearing claims I tc conjure thee to hear in patience, and in pity to forgive. 'Twas not thy form’s “ perfection, thy youth’s fresh bloom, thy

ST. DOMINICK.

237

“ person’s "witching graces, that alone “ could have touched a heart like mine. “ No, oh no! it was the emanation of “ heaven that shone in thy soul ; it was thy “ mind’s intelligence, thy heart’s good-“ ness : even thy errors were dear to me, “ for they sprang from thy virtues, and “ were such as the world only could ren-<< der dangerous to their possessor.

“ Long was the secret of m}T passion “ concealed even from myself ; and, when “ discovered, great and dreadful were the f< struggles with which I endeavoured to “ suppress it. The disparity of our years '* seemed a barrier nature herself had “ drawn between us. But, O Imogen ! “ when the capability of receiving happi-« ness survives the power of awakening “ it ; when sorrow has dimmed the eye’s “ bright lustre, while the soul’s fire is yet <* unextinguished; when the hand of time “ has prematurely faded the form, and the “ heart still continues to bloom; con-“ sciously rich in our own internal trea

238

THE NOVICE OF

“ sure, we see not that others behold only the consumption of our external posses-“ sions, while that which passeth shew re-<e mains unprized,hecauseunknown. Feel-“ ing profoundly the influence and power « of reason, heaven’s best gift,, I did not il despair of conquering by it^s aid what I could not but deem a weakness. How <c far I did, or how far I might have suc-c< ceeded, ’tis now vain to say 5 but in the <c moment when I first began to triumph <c over myself, your father, my friend, my only, friend, conjured me to become the ll husband of his daughter, by that love I “ had awakened in her youthful bosom. O <( Imogen ! that was a moment on which “ I ?nust not, dare not dwell. Suffice it “ to say, I referred him wholly to you, “ then rushed from the villa under pre-t( tence of visiting Florence; but, in the (t indulgence of my turbulent emotions, I “ continued to wander amidst the woods u which skirt the Arno, until your servant [[ delivered me your letter. Oh ! the

ST. DOMINICK.

239

“ emotion with which that letter was re-“ ceived. But alas ! it was not the finger <f of love that traced its lines, but the <{ hand of filial sorrow recording the dic-<e tates of parental dissolution. I flew to “ share, to more than share, your woes ; “ and the first moment of our interview “ convinced me the father’s love for his <c friend had seen the daughter’s incli-“ nation through its own partial medium. “ Imogen, the look of repugnance with “ which you turned from me is still prc-“ sent to my view. Your air, your man-r‘ ner, your countenance, during the pe-“ rusai of the count’s will, your total se-“ elusion from the presence of his friend, “ all spoke a language my heart under-" stood. But, unconsciously-delusive girl, “ the reception which my letter procured f< me, those blandishments which thy ten-“ der affliction seemed to heighten, the " melting glance of those tearful eyes, the “ flattering entreaties of those persuasive “ lips, the fond pressure of that caressing

240

THE NOVICE OF

“ hand!—You conjured me not to aban-“ don you, you clung to me as your only “ friend. Imogen ! Imogen ! who would “ not have been deceived as I was? But “ sweet and transient was the illusion. I f< complied with thy dangerous request ; I “ again became an inmate of the dwelling you inhabited. I trembled, yet I hoped ; “ but I soon ceased to tremble or to hope. “ Certainty succeeded to suspense, and " in the eye of her I loved 1 read nothing “ but aversion, and cold repugnance “ breathed only in the accents of her for <e whose happiness I would have immo-“ laled my own, and triumphed in the “ sacrifice.”

From the humble attitude in which the emotion, amazement, the wrapt attention, the lively interest, and warm admiration of the all-awakened, but now nearly overpowered, Imogen had suffered him to remain, the chevalier de Sorville now arose. A majestic dignity succeeded to the impassioned tenderness of his air, his eyes

ST. DOMINICK.

241

flashed fire, the mild expansion of his brow was contracted into the proud frown of conscious self-command» and with a voice no longer tremulous, he exclaimed : “ So " much for the weakness of human na-“ ture ; now for its strength.”

Then taking the hand of Imogen he held it firmly, and, looking fully but without emotion, said : ff This is the firm grasp “ of friendship, lady, not the trembling “ glowing fold of love. From this mo-raent you have no longer an affianced “ husband, I have no longer an affianced “ bride. Thus for ever do I resign that “ hand elapsed in mine by that of thy “ dying father; thus do I give back that “ faith I believed silently interchanged “ with mine at the shrine of thy sainted mother. The golden hopes my heart “ so fondly nourished, the years of bright “ felicity my fancy sketched, all, all, for ever are now resigned. For that heart, <e voluntarily withdrawn, mine shall never tc again solicit; that love, so decidedly re-

YOL. III.	L



THE NOVICE OF

tc fused, shall never again obtrude its im-“ portunities. You are free, free as air, lady ; but for me, I am bound for life “ to thy service. Oh ! thou child of his “ soul who was dearer to my heart than " the vital drops that visit it, thou whom <f at the shrine of departed excellence I “ vowed to honour, to guard, to protect; * daughter of St. Dorval! was I then so “ little known to thee, that thou couldst <f imagine for my own selfish gratification I would sacrifice thy future peace and “ happiness? No : so may I be adjudged " hereafter, so may I be doomed to misery tc eternal or eternal bliss, as I forward or “ neglect the promotion of thy felicity. “ Thus again in the face of heaven I swear to live for thy happiness alone, “ though my heart-strings break in the “ endeavour to effect it; for were it possi-ct ble that one emotion of love could sur-“ vive the efforts of reason, even in the “ warmest paroxysm of passion at the u altar’s foot, this hand should bestow

ST. DOMINICK.

243

44 you on the object of thy election, nor my ff soul deem that a sacrifice which made you 44 happy. From this moment then behold cc not in me the betrothed lover, the af-44 fianced husband, but the watchful guar-44 dian, the tender parent, the unalterable 44 friend. Thy father, my friend, meant 44 to secure thy felicity; and his sainted 44 spirit, perhaps, at this moment hovers 44 round us, and sheds its benign approval 4 on the effort I make to promote it, 44 though by different means than those his 44 wishes sketched.”

The chevalier ceased to speak. The grandeur, the dignity of virtue involved his air and person, yet so tempered with affection, so moderated by tenderness, that it was obvious the feelings of the man and the rigid fortitude of the philosopher, the weakness of the heart and the energy of reason, were still at variance.

The mind which is truly great, though the interval of passion, of apathy, or of indolence, it may relinquish the exertion

THE NOVICE OF

of its faculties., or give relaxation to its powers, yet under the pressure of exigency it will always rouze itself from its transient inanity, and by the force of great example it will awaken to efforts of kindred greatness. Like the passive pendulum, which but faintly vibrates until its extreme point of oscillation, touched by another's quicker movement, receives and imparts reciprocal and rapid motion; Imogen, whose mind had hitherto been wholly absorbed in her feelings, and who had given herself up wholly to their influence, now, called on by the power of virtue's sacred emulation, awakened to every effort of intellectual greatness of which her mind was susceptible :

“ Not touch’d but wrapt, not waken’d but inspir’d.”

The impression of de Sorville’s virtue, bis magnanimity, his refined and almost romantic generosity, still warm on her soul, her fancy still glowing with the idea of his excellence, her heart swelling with

ST. DOMINICK.

243

gratitude for his goodness towards herself; Imogen, the virtuous but always impulsive, always ardent, Imogen, looking up to her friend as to a being of superior order, fell at his feet who but a moment before had dropped in humble supplication at Aers, and in silence lifted her melting eyes to his. De Sorville, amazed, overwhelmed, endeavoured to raise her.

“ No,” said Imogen firmly ; ff if out-“ ward forms can indicate the humility of <c the inward thought, here will I remain “ until I sue for that forgiveness I hope, tl yet I am not w'orthy to obtain.”

" Imogen !” exclaimed the chevalier in great emotion, and forcibly raising lier in his arms, what it is you mean ?”

“ That I confess myself unworthy of your friendship, unworthy of your ex-“ alted goodness, and yet that I dared to

“ hope------”

“ What ? speak Imogen !”

" That the day shall come when friend-“ ship shall be the least tie that shall unite us.”

246

THE NOVICE OF

'f Imogen !”

O sir she exclaimed with energy and pathos, “ could you see into my heart you would rather pity than condemn, <c you would behold it adoFing that virtue Cf it cannot reach, you would behold its perpetual vibration between the ardor ct of its feelings and the efforts of its rea-son. The child of enthusiasm, borne f<r away by impulse, it is from extraordi-€t nary occasion only I can borrow extra-<c ordinary exertion ; but this heart is not “ destitute of virtue, and therefore not “ wholly unworthy of your care. Be thou si then, O most amiable of men ! its (( gardian, for to thy care from this mo* (C ment I consign it. Supported by thy firm and equable mind, I will endeavour t: to trace thy steps, and shine with a beam borrowed from thy light; but let the “ goal of my endeavours be that reward " which the wishes of my dying father iC promised. Oh ! turn not then from my “ supplication. I know the great dispa-

ST. DOMINICK.

247

rity between us—you all mind, 1 all heart; you all reason, I all feeling ; you <f all thought, *1 all sensation ; you prac-“ tising virtue, and I but loving it. Suffer <f me then to love it most in him who is “ its best representative.”

“ Imogen ! Imogen 1” interrupted de Sorville in violent agitation, “ cease, in ‘f mercy cease. You know not what you “ do; your feelings are warmed ; this is “ but the dream of your imagination.”

No, sir,” said Imogen with dignity : c( I am not always the visionary you sup-“ pose ; and, though I shine not with your " steady light, I too have my moments of “ lumination. No, it is now I cease to <c dream ; ’tis now I am awakened from ** the illusion of my feelings, my passions, 14 and my enthusiasm. Converted from “ the fanaticism of the heart to the pure “ faith of affection and reason by yourex-ample, oh ! then receive to your bosom “ the convert you have made.”

Wholly overcome, the chevalier dropped

248

THE NOVICE OF

in silence at her feet ; then taking both her hands in his,, he solemnly demanded : “ Imogen, does thy heart dictate this re-quest ?”

" So may I be happy in this world and “ the next as it does P* fervently replied Imogen.

“ The the prayers of thy father have " ascended to heaven, and thou art mine. " Receive into thy hands the destinies of “ our loves, for from this moment I con-11 sign them wholly to thee. It is enough “ that thou wilt yet be mine. For thee, and “ for thy wishes or thy delicacy, be it re-served to accelerate or retard the bliss-“ ful period.”

ST. DOMINICK.

249

CHAP. XXVII.

L’amour n’a bien souvent qu’un douceur trompeuse ; 3Iais vivre indifférente, est-ce une vie heureuse?

Corneille.

Sweet recreation barr’d, what doth ensue But moody and dull melancholy?

Shakespeare.

TO wrest from her bosom its last fluttering* weakness, to extinguish the last lingering* spark of an almost-expired passion, and to pursue with an undeviating step that illumined path of virtue and reason she had so boldly entered, was now all that remained for the novice of St. Dominick to

%s

effect. She had vanquished a repugnance rather childish than natural^ rather capricious than reasonable ; and she had adopted that medium of rational happiness which vibrates between the delirium of ecstatic l 2

250

THE NOVICE OF

felicity and the sobriety of placid indifference. Yet to the heart whose pulse is set by nature to the quick throb of rapture’s palpitation, whose nerves are organised to the thrill of wildest bliss, how difficult to teach the lesson of prudent moderation in its enjoyments! Had not the ambition, the emulation of the always proud and emulative Imogen stimulated her to the endeavour, she had drooped in the utter impossibility of the effort. While often, too often, in despite of reason and of prudence, the faded visions of former joys rose on the eye of recollection, dressed in the faint but captivating hues of their primaeval glow, the fairy ecstacies of fancy played in the lingering beam of an awed imagination, and passion’s warm tide rushed over the heart beyond that barrier of feeling reason had erected for its security.

The chevalier deSorville had placed the destiny of his love in the hands of its object, and Imogen had fixed the expiration

ST. DOMINICK.

251

of her mourning for her father as the period when her probation should expire, and when (the weak propensities of her heart subdued) she should unite herself for life to the wisest, the most amiable and virtuous, of men. Meantime the conduct of de Sorville towards his ward held the happiest medium between the tenderness of love and the sobriety of friendship ; the familiar affection of the brother and the never-slumbering care of the guardian. Slow to reprove, but slower to flatter, he pointed out her errors with freedom, while he acknowledged her excellencies with delight. He continued his superintendance of her studies and accomplishments with an ardor that marked the charm which lurked in the task; and, without fatiguing her by obvious assiduity, was always engaged in those graceful little attentions which ever interest a sensible heart, if they do not win it. The effects which his good sense had hoped to produce by associating his sister with his ward had by no means'

252

TUE NOVICE OF

answered his expectation. Imogen, in those hours which the etiquette of their domestic economy obliged her to pass in the society of madame de Rosemont, treated her apathetic guest with that genuine politeness which springs from the goodness of the heart, and that bewitching sweetness of manner which stole its magic from the native excellence of her disposition and elegance of her mind; but further than this she never sought and seldom enjoyed hersociety. That sympathy which forms the broad imperishable basis of every social connection was denied them; and Imogen, who adhered to extremes as much as did madame de Rosemont to the neutral road of mediocrity, either clinging to an object with idolatrous fondness or recoiling in the coldest repugnance, regretted she could not force herself to tolerate the phlegmatic character of madame de Rosemont, or find a place in the wide circle of her affections for the sister of de Sorville, the friend of Pasiphae.

ST. DOMINICK,

2.53

Four months flew on with an even but not a rapid pace. The chevalier de Sor-ville, confiding in the voluntarily-offered affections of his ward, beholding himself unrivaled in her admiration, her esteem, seldom elated by the thrill of temporary transport, and never pursued by the nausea of transient satiety, became daily more enamoured of a solitude which encircled within its boundaries all (hat was most precious to his soul and which bestowed those soft and sober pleasures so consonant to the mild and pensive gravity of his character. The absence of signor Dolce and a few other neighbouring gentry, with the death of the diocesan bishop, and the too-licentious mode of living of many of the occupants of the surrounding villas, reduced the society of the villa cle Fiora almost to its own domestic circle. Madame de Rosemont beheld its contraction with indifference, the chevalier de Sorville with pleasure. Imogen neither with indiffer-

254

THE NOVICE OF

ence nor pleasure. Hitherto she had seen, she had known nothing of the world, either from experience or report. Taste, sentiment, or science, always furnished the leading topic of conversation at the villa de Fiora, and in the convent of St. Dominick all had been professedly

“ The world forgetting, by the world forgot.”

And now that those subjects on which her heart loved to dwell were prohibited its contemplation by prudence, the world became the fancy of her fancy's bright but visionary speculation. Her lively imagination had shed its brightest glow over its fairy scenes of fancied pleasure, and her genius delighted to people them with

<c Such gay creatures of the elements

“ As in the colours of a rainbow live.”

Opposed to this bright but chimerical picture, the sober unvaried tranquillity of her private and uninteresting life stoic on her

ST. DOMINICK.

255

languid mind. “ The same to-day, to-" morrow, and for ever,” time crept on with a slow and even pace, but little consonant to the velocity of her quick changing sensations, the variety of her <c thick-<f coming fancies/' or the animation and eccentricity of her ideas. Even the stream of pleasure she drew from the rich source of intellect had now in some degree lost its spirit, and convinced her that, in the frailty of our present natures, mind alone, however abundant its treasures, is not all sufficient to the completion of mundane felicity ; while her extraordinary, her versatile, her brilliant talents, arrived to their acme of perfection, were denied the reward the unwearied industry and perseverance with which they were cultivated demanded. For deSorville alone she seemed to exist, with him only she conversed, for him her musical genius exerted its delightful powers, for him her paintings were executed ; while her proud ambition called for the stimulus of a less-contracted

256

THE NOVICE OF

applause, and the social principle which smiled eternally in her heart languished to extend its influence in a wider sphere.

Another month was added to the four already elapsed, when a relation of madame de Rosemont became a visitant at the villa by her invitation. The stranger was a young and lively Neapolitan, the widow of a Tuscan nobleman, and a woman of considerable fashion and influence in Florence. From her first introduction the marchese de iVlariotti conceived a violent predilection for the young and original lady de St. Dorval, consonant to the volatility of her character and the warmth and facility of her inclinations, which were seldom actuated but by the caprice of the moment, white Imogen, in the sympathy of youth and reciprocal vivacity, was charmed with her society and fascinated with her manners, which were truly Italian. At the expiration of a month she was to return to Florence, but refused to leave the villa unaccompanied by her new favourite.

ST. DOMINICK.

25?

In her lively way she rallied the chevalier on his spirit of monopoly, urged the danger of concealing his ward from the world, from the effects such prohibition might produce when she became her own mistress j talked of the necessity of introducing a woman of her rank at the Florentine court before she left Italy ; and, determined on carrying her point, teazed, coaxed, rallied, and threatened, by turns. The steady and invariable mind of the chevalier de Sorville would have been proof against all the sophistry of the mar-chese’s entreaties and arguments ; but he could not withstand the melting glance of entreaty that swam in the soft eyes of his ward ; he could not resist the sweet smile of supplication that played on her lip, nor the fire that illumined her fine countenance when the world and its brilliant pleasures became the theme of the signora Ma-riotti’s fascinating eloquence. And the sanguine, ardent, unsophisticated, lady de St. Dorval was at last suffered to depart

258

THE NOVICE OF

with the gay, fashionable, and volatile, marchese de Mariotti.

The court of Florence was at that period the most polished and elegant in Europe; the lustre of the Medicean genius still shed its lingering beams from the ducal throne of Tuscany; the muses still loved to loiter over the natural place of their favourite Lorenzo, and the arts still sought and found protection and reward in the taste and magnificence of his descendants. The drama, even yet in its infancy in England and France, had arrived to a considerable degree of perfection in Italy, from the early revival of the Greek theatre by the cardinal Babrino, the archbishop of Trissino, and the accomplished Leo the Xth : and Imogen, on the evening of her arrival at Florence, had the pleasure of being present at the representation of one of Ariosto’s plays with the brilliant accompaniments of scenic decoration, whose sentiments and fanciful flights had so often charmed her in the closet without ff the

ST. DOMINICK.

259

*f foreign aid of art.” The combined charms of music and poetry, aided by the exertion of dramatic excellence -, the dazzling effect of brilliant illumination ; the splendor and elegance of the company ; with the pleasure, the gaiety that reigned on every side, possessed a nameless enchantment which at once enraptured the senses, awakened the imagination, and delighted the mind of the novice of St. Dominick even to delirium. The marchioness and her protégée had occupied a private box at the theatre, and gone incog. ; but the next day the rank and fortune of her illustrious guest were blazoned through every distinguished circle in Florence, and her conversazioni that evening was at once the most splendid and numerous the Palazzo de Mariotti had ever witnessed. Imogen, still in the interesting habiliments of filial grief, the ‘f customary suit of solemn black,” shrunk from the gaze of curiosity she elicited from every eye ; while the timidity, the reserve of her manner, the

260

THE NOVICE OF

effect of habitual seclusion, not of natural disposition, dampt the admiration her air and person inspired. But as the first flush of wonder, of novelty subsided ; as ambition wakened by example, and genius expanded by the influence of sympathy, Imogen's modest distrust of herself vanished by the comparative estimate she formed of her own qualifications with the talents of those by whom she was surrounded. She beheld the wreath which should entwine the brow of genius frequently adjudged to tasteful mediocrity, and the richest incense of applause offered at the shrine of moderate but fashionable capability.

It was then emulation chased the last lingcringshadowof diffidence ; and genius, flinging aside the veil which modesty and reserve had thrown over it, appeared in all its cloudless lustre, bright, splendid, and luminous. The variety of those talents which education had so highly cultivated ; that elegant store of information which an early thirst for study had accumulated;

ST. DOMINICK.

201

that original naïveté of manner which naturally united the polish of a court to the piquant wildness of simple rusticity; with the youth, the beauty, and rank, of their singular possessor, rendered the lady de St. Dorval the cynosure of fashionable admi-ration, and the popular wonder of the day.

Animated by applause, stimulated by success, her genius seemed almost to rise above itself: the happiest, the most origi-nal poetic flights soon obtained her a distinguished rank among the first improvisa-tori of fashion. The brilliancy of her repartees, and the playful vein of her frolic humour; an early initiation into the attic society of the humoristi3 and her exquisite musical skill, with the addition of her extraordinary vocal powers, and her chaste and correct taste in painting and sculpture, obtained her the flattering title of the c< Muse of the Arno.” Gallantry pursued her every where with its homage; Love offered its tributary sighs at the shrine of her charms ; and Envy, ever hovering near

262

THE NOVICE OF

her, breathed its tainted breath on the rose of triumph which twined its tendrils round her brow, and dimmed the lustre of its blush ere it had matured to its richest glow.

The marchese, whose friendship for her charming guest expired in the very moment that her evident superiority gave birth to jealous}', endeavoured to lessen the train of her followers, by publishing her connection with the chevalier, with the circumstance of the greater part of her fortune devolving to him in case their union did not take place. This anecdote, which she had learnt from madame de Rosemont, and which indeed was pretty generally known, had not produced altogether the effect desired by the fair disseminator : for, if serious passion retired in despair, gallantry became more ardent in the pursuit of its object ; and the adulatory train of Imogen hourly increased in proportion as that of the marchese diminished.

Delighted, dazzled, overwhelmed, from this dream of enchantment Imogen was

ST. DOMINICK.

263

awakened by the unexpected arrival of the chevalier de Sorville, who, at the expiration of three weeks, came to reclaim his precious trust, and lead her from the haunts of flattery, pleasure, and dissipation, to scenes of peaceful and virtuous tranquillity. The affectionate welcome with which Imogen flew to receive her amiable guardian (for in this light only did she now consider him, while every thought of future connection was voluntarily banished) was clouded by her extreme reluctance to quit the fairy scene where joys, but scarce conceived before, had shed their brightest spells around her.

But the chevalier, in a tone of decision he had not hitherto adopted, urged her return, and the marchese did not press her stay. Imogen, with a heart that still fluttered round the beam of its attraction, bid adieu to the refined, the elegant, and dissipated, circles of Florence, where those propensities to every species of elegant pleasure which had so long lain dormant in

THE NOVICE OF

lier heart had first awakened into gay existence.

They proceeded on their little journey in mutual silence and reserve. The chevalier demanded an account of the scenes and the society Imogen had mingled in ; and Imogen, delighted to dwell in recollection on those pleasures whose actual existence had bestowed such poignant gratification, entered on the detail with animated eloquence, and described the nature of her emotions under the influence of novelty, wonder, and delight, with energy and enthusiasm. The chevalier’s attention was silent and uninterrupted, and his only comment a sigh.

Imogen returned to the villa de Fiora with very different ideas from those with which she had left it : retirement for the first time seemed to her to contradict the purposes of nature ; and what before appeared seclusion now wore the aspect of a frightful solitude. The blessings of society for the first time seemed understood by her, and genius and talent only ineeti*

ST. DOMINICK.

265

mable, as they contributed to its enjoyment, and received its applause.

While the insinuating; tones of adulation still murmured their dangerous plaudits in her ear, the coolly-pronounced approbation of her guardian scarcely reached its attention : while the wonder of an admiring multitude still gratified her ambition, the sensible intercourse of friendship no longer interested her mind : while still fascinated by the bewitching softness of the Florentine beauties, their tender persuasive air and brilliant accomplishments, the cold, the phlegmatic character and uninteresting manners of madame de Rosemont changed the former toléra-tion once granted them into absolute repugnance. A month had now elapsed beyond the period allotted by her father for her residence at the villa de Fiora, and Imogen beheld that month elapse and another commence with impatience and disappointment. To those who have once VOL. III.	iM

266

THE NOVICE OF

felt the thrilling* melody of sweet renown/' who are conscious of wasting those talents, that genius, in obscurity which are calculated to delight and to instruct the world, and to obtain for their possessor that enviable distinction which fame bestows, seclusion and solitude appear the worst of evils, and the envy and persecution which superior merit ever elicits preferable to pursuing unknown and undistinguished “ the noiseless tenor of their way."

The unoccupied heart of Imogen left ample scope to the ambition of her mind to exert its influence ; and she who was born to feel and to inspire the best, the most exalted, of all human passions, yet who dared not love where she would, and could not love where she ought, pursued the gratification of her vanity when that of the affections was denied her, and sighed for the homage of a world which she would still have sacrificed for the empire of a kindred heart. Preyed on by

ST. DOMINICK

267

apathy, by discontent, yet too timid to hint the source of her uneasiness to her guardian, her vivacity fled, her atten-tion to her studies slackened, her conversation was languid, and her manner reserved.

One evening as she worked in silence, interrupted only her own sighs, at the side of the usually-silent madame de Rosemont, a laquais delivered a message from the chevalier de Sorville, requesting her presence in the study. Imogen threw by her work, and, vibrating between doubt and hope, apprehension and curiosity, wenl to her guardian. She found him writing, and surrounded by papers, parchments, and all the insignia of business. He rose with a tender smile to receive her, and, having led her to a seat by himself, exclaimed, <c You, who, I trust, are now “ acquainted with my heart, who govern its every movement, cannot be unconscious “ that the society of my charming ward, <e my interesting pupil, constitutes its

THE NOVICE OF

“ greatest though perhaps not its safest “ blessing; you therefore willnot con-strue what I am about to mention, into “ a language unfavourable to my affection ‘f or my taste, or a violation of the laws of hospitality, if I propose to you your (f immediate removal from the villa de “ Fiora.”

Whatever you propose, sir,” said Imogen, with a cheek coloured with surprise and pleasure, must meet my approbation.”

“ In this instance, at least,”-said the chevalier pointedly, " it will do more, it “ will meet your long-cherished ardent “ wishes.”

The colouring of pleasure faded on the cheek of Imogen, and she stammered out, “ I hope, sir, you do not believe, do not

“ think, that-----”

“O Imogen !” interrupted deSorville impressively, <f thy feelings, as yet unprac-“ tised to the world's mechanical impulse, “ wear no veil; and the wishes of thy

ST. DOMINION.

269

,c heart, thy imagination, swim in thy eyes “ and beam in thy countenance, even ff when thy lips deny them existence, and tç thou fanciest they are concealed from " every observation. It was a false deli-“ cacy that prevented your acknowledg-ing them to your friend, and it was sel-fishness in him that prevented his anti-" cipating their utterance. I have long ,c perceived that satiety hung upon thy “ life’s too tranquil round, and that those whom you know, and with whom you were associated, could confer no happi-ness commensurate with that you ex-“ pect to enjoy with those whom you did “ not know. But closely indeed is the " selfish principle interwoven with our na-tures, when it can interfere with my af-" fection for thee; for a miser, a very “ miser, of the happiness your society confers, 1 dared not, could not propose to relinquish my treasure, until the vow “ so solemnly made recurred to my me-mory, that I would live only for your felicity.”

270

THE NOVICE OF

“ And will a change of scene, my dear f' friend,” exclaimed Imogen with vivacity and tenderness, “ produce a change ff of sentiment? Oh, no ! In solitude or “ in society, now and ever, my friend, my guardian, my preceptor, my guide, it is “ in the world your presence will be most requisite to my happiness and safety ; it “ is in the world I shall most need your “ care, your guardianship, and advice.” The chevalier raised the hand presented to him to his lips, saying, “ And what “ does my sweet Imogen mean by that “ oft-mistaken term the world?'1

“ Why,” said Imogen, playfully returning the smile, ff shall we not go to Paris from hence ?”

“ To Paris !” repeated de Sorville, in a tone of disappointment. “ I did hope “ your first residence, in quitting this “ peaceful solitude, would have been at the <c seat of your ancestors.”

“ I hoped so too,” replied she ; “ and “ had I left Tuscany two months back it

ST. DOMINICK.

271

ft should have been. But (he season is tf now so far advanced ; and several French “ gentlemen, whom I met at Florence, as* “ sured me this winter was expected to be the most brilliant Paris ever witnessed; “ and the king himself, it is supposed, rf will raise the standard of elegant and

ff refined pleasure, and------”

ff And you, Imogen, you pant to enlist “ beneath its banners, and to become its “ most ardent votarist.”

“ A votarist, perhaps, sir, but not a “ fanatic, I hope,” returned Imogen.

“ O Imogen, you were not born to enjoy with moderation ; your pleasures and your woes will ever rise even be-yond the scale of moderate concep-“ tion j and long and trying is the pro-hation thou wilt have to endure, ere “ that keen susceptibility to every existing impression, that ardor of expecta-“ tion, that energy of feeling, shall sub-“ side, which ever render their possessor the prey of sanguine expectation and

272

THE NOVICE OF

consequent disappointment. But let ff me not by ill-timed caution damp the “ lustre of hope and imagination. Alas ! too soon will they fade in the influence of experience. Although I would al-ec ways wish you to be slow to decide, 1 would have you prompt to execute.— ce We have now determined on leaving “ Italy. Let the day of our departure fl be fixed by yourself. I shall dispatch e< a courier to-morrow for France, in <c order to prepare your Parisian agent, and the maître d'hotcl at the hotel St. Dorval, for your arrival. The “ same courier will carry letters to your “ Languedocian and Provençal stewards, “ to require their attendance at Avig-t( non, that you may meet them on the “ way, and that you may yourself look over and examine their accounts, and receive your rents, since your journey “ to and residence in Paris will be attend-i( ed with a considerable expense : be-<É sides, you will shortly be of age, and

ST. DOMINICK.

2 73

ee it will be requisite you should form an “ establishment suitable to the rank and “ possessions of the last noble descendant of the illustrious house of St. Dorval. Cl Your residence will of course be at the “ hotel de St. Dorval, one of the most no-f: ble though most ancient in Paris.— Your father’s letter to the princess de “ Guise will procure you the sanction and “ countenance of one of the first women " in France, and an introduction into the ff first circles. My sister will accompany ‘f you to France, and reside during your stay at Paris at lier own hotel, which is ff in the neighbourhood of yours, so that “ her vicinity to you will still afford you ff her matrooly sanction. For myself, I “ shall take up my residence in the house

“ of a friend until----”

The chevalier abruptly paused and changed colour.

f< Until you legally become the master le of mine,” mentally added Imogen, from m 2

274

THE NOVICE OF

whose cheek and eye the glow of animation fled.

“ Until” continued de Sorville, “you “ may please to leave Paris for the shades <l of the chateau de St. Dorval.”

Imogen’s spirits rallied, her gratified heart again sent a pleasurable blush to her cheek, and all within her mind was the delightful flurry of hope and expectation. The chevalier now arose, and taking her hand, said, fc I have now only to add, that I request you will draw on me for any sums you may have occasion for <f previous to your departure. You men-“ tioned a wish to purchase some paint-“ ings and statues belonging to the house <r of a deceased nobleman, celebrated for “ his taste at Florence in these arts.”

'£ Yes,” said Imogen delightedly, I “ will buy them all. I saw too some (l beautiful Etruscan vases and lamps, “ some fine antique stands and tripods, “ some Venetian mirrors and marble slabs, “ which are to be disposed of, and were

ST. DOMINICK.

275

€€ pointed out to me by some cognoscenti (S of distinguished taste, which I dare say ce would enliven the heavy cumbrous fur-ic niture with which the French antiquated <• taste has doubtless tilled the hotel de St. ‘f Dorval.”

<f Then to-morrow,” said the chevalier smiling, we will all go for a day or two <c to Florence, and get some of your dilet-“ tanti friends to assist us in the pur-chase.”

u But first,” said she, in a tone of sudden recollection, f‘ let us appropriate a “ sum to completing that asylum for or-“ phan children on the spot where I lost <( both my dear parents.”

The chevalier impulsively embraced her.

Amiable Imogen !” said he ; “ for the “ heart which thus, in the moment of its tf flush of pleasure, can steal a thought “ from grandeur and ostentation to dedi-“ cate it to benevolence and charity, I c< shall have henceforth nothing to fear.”

276

THE NOVICE OF

“ And did you ever fear for my heart ?** asked Imogen with a reproachful smile.

“ For thy heart ? oh ! never. But,

“ Imogen, the influence of the passions, <c whether urged by taste, by ambition, Cc or by vanity, is even over the best heart c* sometimes omnipotent. A fine picture “ has robbed many a wretch of the pit-6i tance that was his due, and science “ sometimes intruded on the boundaries “ of benevolence ; but you, in pursuing “ the objects of your taste, have not re-u linquished those of your humanity.’1 “ A compliment, or, if you will, a plea-Ci sing truth, from you,” said Imogen, putting both her hands endearingly into those of the chevalier, “ is always so dear “ to me, that it is ever my stimulus to an t( exertion to merit another. Well, I will “ go and inform madame de Rosemont of ourintended removal. But first tell me u you are not displeased with me.”

“ Displeased with you, Imogen ?”

“ Yes, for this idle longing after tlie

ST. DOMINICK.

277

“ world, this weariness of our sweet and “ tranquil solitude. But then, dear che-u valier, ’tis so natural to love society at <c my age, and to sigh for a change of “ place and situation—is it not, sir?” ic Oh most natural, Imogen, and, in-u deed, in some respects, most necessary. “ Perpetual sameness and perpetual se-“ elusion produce a plethory of the mind ‘ and heart, and yours are both too rich u to be suffered to prey on themselves. “ Besides, association with new charac-“ ters awakens new reflections, and novel “ objects and situations rouse the mind tc from lethargy, give it a quick and plea-“ sing impulse, and invest it with a fresh “ train of pungent and lively ideas.” te Oh ! you are so good, my dear sir, “ so very indulgent to all my little weak-“ nesses, that, where even my own self-“ love can make no excuse for my follies, u your goodness ever finds a ready plea. “ Well, I shall order supper in the por-u ticos it is a delicious evening, and you

THE NOVICE OF

“ will join us soon—do join us soon. I “ think somehow I am never secure of “ myself but in your presence ”

The chevalier drew her gently towards him, and for the first time impressed a kiss on a cheek that deeply blushed its bashful sense of the ardent pressure.— Then leading her towards the door, he said, “ Go, syren! you steal me from my-“ self.”

CHAP. XXVIII.

And hence the charm historic scenes impart ; Hence Tiber awes, and Avon melts the heart ; Aerial forms in Tempi's classic vale Glance thro’ the gloom and whisper in the gale ; In wild Vaucluse with Love and Laura dwell. And watch and weep in Eloisa’s cell.

Pleasures of Memory, Part I.

THE morning of their departure from Italy at last arrived, and Imogen bade adieu to the shades of the Arno with a smile that was dimmed with a tear.—

ST. DOMINICK.

279

Her heart rapturously bounded forward towards the goal of pleasure and variety, yet a tender melancholy checked its pulsation when she bade farewell to the spot which contained the ashes of her parents.

Their travelling suite consisted of three carriages and a number of horsemen.— The lady de Rosemont travelled with her own woman in a litter, Imogen and the chevalier de Sorville in an open vehicle for the convenience of viewing the. country, and Beatrice and two female attendants in one of the carriages of the late count.

Imogen had proceeded a considerable way, wrapt in a profound reverie and involved in a musing silence, which the chevalier did not attempt to interrupt ; while her tearful and oft-wiped eyes still dwelt on the groves of de Fiora, until the haze of distance veiled them in its blue mists, and blended their glowing scenes in the undistinguished tint of the remote perspective landscape. But as those ob-

THE NOVICE OF

jects which sustained the melancholy train of her pensive ideas gradually receded from her strained glance, her perception awakened to the scones through which she traveled. Her young and ardent fancy again plumed its drooping wing, and soared into the airy regions of expected joys and fancied pleasures,, while the beauty and variety of those objects which struck her eye at every step again awakened her mind to the reception of delightful impressions.

In order to vary their route, and to obviate those melancholy recollections having gone over the same ground with the count de St. Dorval might elicit, the chevalier planned that they should pass through the Genoese territories on their way to Avignon, from thence cross the Rhone, a little above its confluence with the Durance, to Languedoc, and so proceed by Viverais, Auvergne, and Blaisois, (the most beautiful provinces in France,) to Paris.

ST. DOMINICK.

281

To render this journey a tour of taste, of pleasure, of sentiment, and instruction, to his charming ward, it was proposed that they should visit every spot endowed with a moral interest, as well as enriched by natural beauty, which held a distinguished place in the records of history, was sacred to the acts of the patriot, the feats of the hero, or the memory of departed genius.

They continued to proceed along the banks of the Arno, as it wound its varying course from the heights of the snow-crowned Appenines, receiving in its fertilizing progress the tributary streams of the humble Sieva, till it poured its blue waves into the bosom of the Mediterranean.

As they passed through the beautiful' Val de Arno, all the enthusiast raptures of picturesque taste awakened in the bosom of Imogen. The light and elegant villas of the Tuscan nobility betrayed their shining marble domes through the foliage of pomegranate groves, then rich in their

282

THE NOVICE OF

golden fruit, and the glowing orangeries, whose trees, like her o»vn young and intelligent mind, were at once rich in fruit and blossom. Groupes of peasantry, animated by that fire and vivacity which distinguishes the natives of Tuscany, were gathering in the olives from plantations that seemed unable to support the abundance of their produce ; while their labour was cheered by the oboe’s enlivening tones, which waked the echo of the hills with a sound as picturesque as the scenes through which it vibrated.

It is supposed,” said the chevalier, <c that this charming valley was a lake be-“ fore the Arno forced its passage a little “ above Regnano, whose spires you may Cc now see glittering above that grove of “ almonds to the left.”

“As the fables of ancient naturalists,” said Imogen, “ tell us, the Mediterranean C£ forced its passage through those moun-<c tains which now on either side guard “ the coasts of Europe and Africa. When





14*

• i ‘	.9	«	1	-*•	à a t

ue»<M • '^9 la t ^nta •

»...	> U» w ,*|i	S»	•	>lu

t *4».	I«v *• f * «I #	' A.*-» I

' V •	*«Ai II 4 « <4* .fu	*

Mr>. « #	>	^	»

•	f« i a i"<..	*	r>*	4Jf

vmr? ♦»* • ir^-n VJ 4	«W> N 9

- #•-	* -, a

• rtt|ri>	r ♦	* ‘Jt	•	•

^0» 4M •	tu*	v>	«

4>	fir	I	•«'	*

«M V-^*^ tm	t	-»

e»i	b#	•	•

ë»■•• W *~%tr \+m

^.»|M »>t	HM,

^	<. ii /«■ m	iiH •	••

f»	^ VM4*	Wo*	1

.

^	W«	iffll

*	• ■ m * n-

2S4

THE NOVICE OF

“ Do you know, my dear sir, I should iS like infinitely to perform a classic pil-ie grimage through Italy, and pay my ho-<c mage at the many shrines it contains, “ sacred to the remains of departed ge-£f nius. Pensively would I wander to the iC convent of St. Dominick in Ferrara to tc pour the oblation of a tear on the tomb “ of Ariosto, and, ere its trace was yet ef-f£ faced from my cheek, direct my steps to “ the blue hills of Euganné, where repose “ the ashes of Petrarch ; while at Pausi-

“ lippo I would------”

Here a yawn from madame de Rosemont, who saw nothing in aheap of ruined walls that compensated for the endurance of a vertical sun, interrupted the poetic route of Imogen ; and the chevalier laughingly said : **' But, my fair enthusiast, in “ your homage for the dead, pray take the “ living into your consideration, and re-“ collect that neither you nor my sister <f have had any refreshment since you left ft the villa de Fiora.”

ST. DOMINICK.

285

Imogen., with a blush and a smile, apologized to madame de Rosemont, and they proceeded to the inn, where a repast was prepared for them by their own attendants. The heat preventing theirroute for that day, they indulged themselves in a siesta, and set out by moon-light on their journey; Imogen and madame de Rosemont in the litter, the chevalier on horseback. Towards morning they bade adieu to Tuscany, its luxuriant groves of citron and orange, its vine-mantled hills, rich in mines of porphyry, marble, and alabaster, and entered the petty state of Lucca. Its little capital, scarcely three miles in circumference, but situated in a beautiful plain, watered by the river Sirchio, was their next stage ; but, true to the ancient customs of the miniature city, the chevalier and his suite were refused admittance until they deposited their swords and firearms at its portals. Having visited the manufactories of gold and silver tissues, for which Lucca is so famous, and made

286

THE NOVICE Or

some considerable purchases, they set out before the next morning’s dawn for the Genoese territories. As they coasted along the Mediterranean, the grandeur, richness, beauty, and variety, of the scene roused all the tasteful perceptions of poetry and painting in the mind of Imogen. Sometimes, as they descended into a fertile glen, that sheltered in its bosom some rural village, they lost every trace of that maritime character which should have marked its vicinity to the sea; and again gradually stealing from the lowland path along the winding heights of some cultivated eminence, the ocean scenery again betrayed its features ; while on the other side towns, villas, and monasteries, seemed to repose at the base of the Appenines, whose distant summits, lit up with the sun’s refracted beam, appeared to float on the horizon like luminous vapours.

As they receded from the sea, and advanced into the heart of the country, the landscape assumed a new and striking

ST. DOMINICK.

281

aspect; its features became wild, bold, and savage, and the soil, rigid, mountainous, and barren, scarcely afforded sustenance to the lizard, which hung suspended from the vivid heights of the craggy hill, till fancy shrunk in horror from its perilous contemplation, or to the mountain goat, who, clinging to the pointed angles of a cliff, browsed on the scanty vegetation its deep recesses afforded.

Such a scene as this/’ said Imogen, who had resumed her seat in the cabriolet, and who almost shuddered as they wound their devious way beneath the threatening danger of impending rocks, “ such a scene “ as this is finely suited to the sublime " but gloomy genius of Dante, as are the “ rich and glowing landscapes we have left to the airy and animated fancy of “ Ariosto.’*

She then repeated some passages from the Inferno and the Orlando Furioso in proof of her assertion ; to which the chevalier delightedly assented, and repeated

288

THE NOVICE OF

himself a few more equally appropriate quotations.

“ But/' he added, ff a scene which will €( awaken a different interest is about to “ break upon our view.”

He then, as they advanced and the scene expanded, pointed out to his companion’s observation a wild and desert track, whose level sands reflected back the beams of the sun.

“ That spot,” said he, presenting Imogen with a small telescope, is famous in “ sacred tradition as being the desert where fe Mary Magdalen performed her penance ee after the death of her divine reformer. f< It was there she retired shortly after her “ arrival at Marseilles with Lazarus and Joseph, and wept away the sad evening “ of her life amidst those desert wilds.” ct I thank you for this anecdote, my “ dear sir,” said Imogen. It adds a cc livelier interest to that already awakened “ by the most interesting, though one of “ the least perfect, characters the New

ST. DOMINICK.

289

“ Testament affords ; an interest which “ perhaps arises from the sympathy of “ human nature with its kindred frailty.

“ Mary was too frail not to excite com-,f passion, and too feelingly penitent not “ to mingle admiration for her sensibility ff with pity for her errors.”

Towards the eveningof this day “ Genoa • “ il Superbo” rose on the eye of the travelers in the form of a magnificent amphitheatre. Here they remained one day, visiting every thing the city afforded worthy of observation, and the following morning, an hour before sun-rise, set off for Provence. They preferred crossing the little river War to proceeding by the mountain path, as they were all eager once more to touch on French ground. The quick and frequent transition of soil, scene, and climate, which characterises Provence, afforded to Imogen’s mind a perpetual variety of tasteful gratification. The hot winds which blew from the Mediterranean gradually moderated into ge-

VOL. III.	N

290

THE NOVICE OF

niai tepid gales as they receded further from the sea-shore; while to the dry and sandy soil of the central partssucceeded expansive plains of rich vegetation, intersected with innumerable streams, whose fertilized banks were covered with flocks, some reposing amidst the abundance of their pasturage, and some, just emerged from the water, shaking their dripping snowy fleece to the flashing sun-beam ; while the blue aerial brows of the surrounding hills majestically beetled over the vineyards that crept along their bases, and mingled their fantastic drapery with the glowing plantations of the fig, orange, almond, and pomegranate trees. As they advanced northward, that branch of the Alps which runs north-east of Provence, and divides it from the territories of the Sardinian monarch, appeared distinct to the eye.

“ Do you recollect/' said Imogen, as they gazed on their stupendous heights, (t in what contempt the Italians of the four-st teenlh century held all those who dwelt

ST. DOMINICK.

291

“ on this side the Alps? ‘ Those tramon-“ lanes, those barbarians,’ says Petrarch, “ ‘ from whom we are separated by the “ Alps, are almost unacquainted even with “ the name of Homer; the book which “ passes there under that title is the sorry “ abridgement of a school boy/ ”

“ And yet,” said the chevalier, “ in “ less than two centuries after, Rome was “ taken and pillaged by those barbarians, “ and their pope made a prisoner by one “ of the princes of France/’

“ The heroic but unfortunate duke de “ Bourbon,” said Imogen, “ who fell the u victim of his monarch’s envy and of the “jealousy of the queen mother.”

“ Your memory is so accurate,” said the chevalier smiling, “ that you would “ rank high on the intellectual scale in “ Gascony, where that gift is preferred “ to every other faculty of the human " mind.”

They now continued to wind along a road that lay at the foot of the Alps,

292

THE NOVICE OF

amidst the soft gloom and fragrant dews of stealing twilight.

u See,” said the chevalier, “ the sum-“ mit of that Alpine height still gleams on “ the horizon like a meteor, as its snowy “ point catches the sun's last fading beam, (i while the lesser hills are already involved “ in the mists of evening that roll like “ agitated billows down their rugged ie sides.”

And hark, dear sir,” exclaimed the delighted Imogen, “ what a fine corres-“ ponding effect does that mountain tor-“ rent produce as its deep roar mingles “ with the faint vibration of that distant “ horn, whose wild tones find an endless “ echo in the cavities of the hills.”

The moon, as it now broke from behind a mass of clouds, skirting their broken sides with its silver beams, poured its mild light over a scene whose interest varied with every progressive step.

“ The landscape begins,” said the chevalier, “ too lose its character of the sub-

ST. DOMINICK.

293

“ lime, and steal into the beautiful. This “ fading Alpine chain, you perceive, is “ softening by an almost imperceptible 'r degree into gentle swells, and half a “ league further will lose itself in the rich “ and level plains of Provence.

About midnight they reached a romantic village ten leagues from the city of Aix. Their auberge was the rude hut of a peasant, where the avant-courier procured them such accommodation as such a place could be supposed to afford. Every thing,-however, that was new to Imogen vras delightful ; and their own traveling stores being entirely exhausted, she supped cheerfully on fried eggs and black bread, and slept as soundly on a mattress of straw as if the cygnet had contributed its bosom's softness to lure her repose ; while the ge-nerally-placid temper of madame de Rosemont was a little forced from its calm ,f mood” at an inconvenience which, as she had been an old traveler, had not novelty to recommend it, and to which habit

294

THE NOVICE OF

itself would not have easily reconciled her. The next morning’, as

“ Jocund dawn sat tip-toe on the misty “ Mountain’s top,”

they proceeded on their route, and began to coast along the delicious banks of the Durance. About noon they came within sight of Avignon. All the emotion with which Imogen had last beheld it, and the recollection of her father having then accompanied her, struck upon her awakened mind. The hilarity of her countenance vanished, her smiles of gratified taste disappeared, and tears of sorrowing recollection dimmed those eyes whose glance no longer dwelt in rapture on the surrounding beauties of nature's gay creation. The chevalier, entering at once into the nature of her feelings, yet with his usual refined delicacy appearing not to notice them, said : <f The curiosity you expressed, when <f we last beheld those spires, to visit Avig-c< non can now be gratified with infinitely more interest and pleasure ; for you are

ST. DOM KM CK.

295

w now not only acquainted with its poli-“ tical history, but you have read the life “and works and sneak the lan^uaire of

o o

“ Petrarch.

Imogen, whose heart was more alive than her fancy, answered only by a sigh ; and, while the chevalier continued to talk of Avignon, thought only of her father.

On their arrival at Avignon they were chagrined to find the agents had not been punctual to the appointment made by the chevalier, and de Sorviile proposed,that, as no business could be transacted until they arrived, they should spend the intermediate time in visiting every thing worthy of attention in a place pregnant with objects of curiosity and interest. When they had dined, the chevalier and Imogen (madame de Rosemont refusing to accompany them on the plea of fatigue) went to visit the tomb of Laura. The young traveler, with the liveliest emotions of enthusiasm and curiosity, traversed the numerous streets of this ancient and magnificent

296

THË NOVICE OF

city, while, amidst the various changes it had sustained in a succession of ages, she attempted to ascertain those places identified in the familiar letters of Petrarch, Boccace, and Philip de Vitre. The chevalier pointed out to her observation the palace which for more than half a century had been the papal residence, and which, even in its decay, gave evidence of its former splendor and magnificence; while in the suburbs a guide conducted them to a house which tradition still marked as having been the residence of the illastriousand un-tunale Laura de Sade. As they returned to the town, and walked up the street leading to the church of St. Clair, going to which Petrarch first beheld the mistress which his passion had immortalized, the beautiful picture he had drawn of her in one of the happiest of his sonnets recurred to the memory of Imogen, and, under the influence of awakened imagination, she almost thought she beheld the lovely form of Laura gliding towards her with that

ST. DOMINÎCK.

297

look of infantile sweetness and vivacity her lover so fondly describes.

When they arrived at the church of the Cordeliers, which contained her ashes, a young sacristan, a brother of the order, who was leaning against the door of the chancel as they entered, politely offered to be their guide ; and, lighting a flambeau that lay on a table in the vestry, conducted them to the tomb of Laura. It was a plain marble slab erected beneath the arch which formed the entrance into the chapel.

“ There,” said the young sacristan, “ moulder the remains of that immortal “ beauty. Francis the First ordered this “ tomb to be opened in his presence, influ-44 enced by a wish to ascertain whether this “ was the tomb of Petrarch’s mistress.”

<f And was his curiosity gratified ?” demanded Imogen eagerly.

t( Lady, a few small human bones,” re~ plied the other, 4' and a sonnet of Pe-“ trarch’s, were all that repaid his exer-n 2

29S

THE NOVICE OF

“ tions, were all that remained of Hie beau-“ tiful Laura.’'

fc Alas!” exclaimed Imogen, applying her veil to her eyes.

“ Francis the First/' said the chevalier, gently drawing her away from her melancholy object of contemplation, ,r Francis <f the First was, with the exception of our <e present king, not only the most heroic u and valiant monarch France everboast-“ ed, but the most enlightened and ac-€t complished. How strongly docs this “ little anecdote mark his character, and <{ how eminently must he have possessed “ that species of enthusiasm which ever characterises genius, and almost always Ce accompanies feeling and taste !"

The lady Laura,” said the sacristan, extinguishing his torch as they reached the chancel, ff died, as it is said, of the plague.”	»

“ Which,” added the chevalier, “ de-a solated all Europe in 1347. I remem-/ ber/' he continued, addressing Imogen,

ST. DOMINICK.

299

ec how much you were affected by the “ animated but dreadful picture drawn of ic it by Roccace.”

Then, thanking the courteous brother for his polite attention, they returned to the auberge, where they found the agents, who had arrived in their absence.

The rest of the evening and part of the ensuing morning were wholly devoted to business. Imogen, at the chevalier’s request, examined every account and settlement herself, and ascertained to a fraction the extent of her personal and landed property ; and, having recommended her tenantry and serfs to the care of her agents until she should return to Provence herself, and received a considerable sum of money, she bade adieu to Avignon.

When they were seated in the light bark which wafted them across the Rhone to Languedoc, Imogen fixed her eyes on the retreating spires of Avignon with profound emotion; and as the sun shed its meridian beam on the beautiful vale of Comptât

THE NOVICE OF

Venaison, in which it was situated, she recollected the description given of it by Petrarch, who, viewing it through the medium of his own gloomy fate, paints it as a desert watered by a river which the spirit of the storms perpetually invested with tempestuous horrors.

" Unhappy Petrarch!” mentally exclaimed Imogen: ct blest with nature’s ci richest endowments, genius, health, and “ beauty, honoured with the esteem of the first potentate of the earth ; though sur-rounded by all that could delight the mind or gratify the ambition of man, u still was thy heart dead to pleasure, for <c the idol of its homage was lost to thee <c for ever!”

Like those sympathetic tones produced in a quiescent chord agitated by the pulses of the air, and vibrating in unison with the sound struck from an approximating string, so did this simple, this impulsive apostrophe to the misfortunes of the unhappy Petrarch produce in the mind of

ST. DOMINICK.

301

Imogen a kindred recollection of her own long-stifled and secret source of sorrow; which still, in the intervals of sweet but dangerous memory, controlled every latent fibre of her heart, and waked the nerve of passion, until despair rather than reason subdued its vita 1 thrill.

From one of those soul-dissolving reveries, so sweet and yet so fatal, and which since her arrival in France (though not without the severest self-reprobation) she had indulged more frequently than she had done since her affiance and union with the chevalier de Sorville, the chevalier himself awakened her by pointing out some beautiful features in the landscapes to her observation. Imogen, endeavouring to rouse herself, wiped a tear from her cheek, and stifled a sigh on her lip, and then took a part, though an incoherent one, in the conversation.

Having again rejoined their carriages, they continued to wind along the shores of the Loire, which, rising in the Cevenncs,

502

TME NOVICE OF

flows through the most beautiful provinces in France, and, swelled in its progress by the tributary streams of many inferior rivers, pours itself into the Bay of Biscay. The travellers passed with great rapidity through Viverais, where large parties of military being stationed rendered provi-sionsand accommodation extremely scarce; but in the beautiful plains of Auvergne they lingered with delight. Imogen was even sensible of a tender regret in leaving that romantic province, and could scarcely tear herself away from the enchanting valley of Simagne.

At the small hut ancient town of Usson they proposed remaining two days. Its castle, or rather fortress, was then the retreat of the beautiful but unfortunate Margaret de Valois, the daughter of Catherine de Medicis, and the long-neglected wife of Henry the Fourth. Madame de Rosemont in the early part of her life had been in the queen’s service, and more attached to the person of her royal mistress than

ST. DOMINICK.

303

was generally compatible with the coldness of her disposition. Since her marriage with the baron de Rosemont she had seen the queen but once, who had received her with such gracious kindness as induced her to seize on the opportunity passing through Usson afforded her of again paying her respects.

As they approached Usson, Imogen fixed her eyes on its ancient fortress with a thrill of profound emotion. The castle of Usson stood upon a rock, savage, wild, and inaccessible, and its gloomy turrets threw their bold and dark shadows over a river which wound round its base.

ft 1 do not wonder,’’ said the chevalier, observing the expressive countenance of Imogen, “ that you should behold that gloomy structure with interest and eu-ff riosity, the voluntary prison of the ff daughter, the sister, and the wife, of a king. During the civil wars carried on cc between her brother, Charles the Ninth, t£ and her then persecuted royal husband.

304

THE NOVICE OF

ct Margaret retired ta Agen, where she held for some time her miniature court; <e but,, being by her unnatural brother 9€ forced from thence and brought priso-€t ner to Usson, by an address worthy of that genius for which she is so justly “ celebrated, she found means to expel €C the marquis de Carmelac, the governor, “ made herself mistress of the place, and, “ still deprived of that rank she should “ hold in the world by the aversion of her husband, keeps there her little court/1 While the chevalier was speaking, Imogen for the first time observed some trace of emotion in the countenance of madame de Rosemont. The affections of her youth seemed to warm her habitually-cold heart ; and, with eyes not un moistened by a tear, she related some interesting anecdotes of her royal mistress, whose character she endeavoured with some energy to clear from the aspersions of levity so generally cast on it. Imogen thought her phlegmatic friend never appeared so amiable, and she

ST. DÔVINICK.

305

involuntarily kissed her hand as she thanked her for the gratification she had afforded her.

The momingafter theirarrival at Usson the chevalier and his noble ward, equally anxious to behold this extraordinary woman as madame de Rosemont, and as the queen received the visits of all travelers pi' rank with courteous condescension, sent in their names to the chamberlain ; and, having changed their simple traveling habits for dresses suitable to the occasion, as soon as they had obtained leave of presentation by one of the gentlemen in waiting, they proceeded to the castle. Having passed through a large suite of apartments, vast, gloomy, and antiquated, though not destitute of splendor, in some of which a few straggling courtiers were lounging, and in others playing at primero and chess, they were conducted by a gentleman into the chamber of audience. The queen was standing at a window, conversing with some foreign officers of distinc-

306

THE NOVICE OV

tion, and surrounded by all the principal nobility of her little court. Her reception of the travellers was elegant and condescending, and her dignified familiarity at once elicited affection and imposed respect. Madame de Rosemont she instantly and affectionately recognized as an old friend ; nnd, in her conversation with her, dwelt with affecting earnestnesson there* collection of that period when they had been first known to each other, when a world bowed at lier nod, and all that rank, beauty, power, and talents, could confer, contributed to render her happy. The chevalier she addressed with great politeness; and, when Imogen was introduced to her as the lady de St. Dorval of Provence, she gazed on her with apparent pleasure and curiosity, and said that she recollected the late count de St. Dorval, one of the most accomplished cavaliers of his day, when he broke a lance at a tournament given by her brother, Francis the Second. She more than once smiled at

ST. DOMINICK.

.307

the naïveté of Imogen’s answers,, which, though uttered with great simplicity and a blushing countenance, were full of point ; and, turning from her with a smile, she said to one of her courtiers: “ She is less “ beautiful than touching; but there lurks “ more danger in her amiable originality “ than even in beauty itself.”

Although the queen had lost that gloss of loveliness which rendered her so celebrated as a beauty, she was still charming, and never perhaps more truly interesting. The air un peu libertin which still reveled in her beautiful eyes was indicative of the vivacity of her character, which the invidious malice of her enemies had construed into a criminal levity. The travelers took leave of this amiable but nominal sovereign, impressed with the highest admiration of her manners, person, and accomplishments.

“ For the first time/' said Imogen, ffI “ perceive a shade in the character of our “ gallant king. How can he feel an



THE NOVICE OF

le aversion for or abandon this charming “ woman ?”

It is indeed a problem,” said the chevalier, iC only to be solved by ttfe influence t( of party and religious bigotry. The “ marriage was a political one, but Mar* <f garet had charms of person and mind to Cf convert it into a union of love, could she have taught the king to forget she was <f the daughter of the house of Valois and “ a Catholic. The king too found a sanc-“ tion for his indifference in the levity of “ the queen, who sought in the pleasures tf of an adulatory world an equivalent for ic those sweet and sober enjoyments she “ was deprived of in her domestic sphere.” The next town they made any stay in beyond their usual nightly stage was Blois, induced by their wishes to visit its castle^ so renowned in the annals of that age, and where so many recent facts had occurred to awaken interest in the coldest bosom, and animate the heart to the liveliest throb of enthusiasm. Having obtained leave of

ST. DOMINICK.

300

admittance from the governor, accompanied by an officer of the garrison, an old friend of the chevalier’s, they proceeded to that ancient and magnificent structure which had been the tomb of so many princes.

<f Here,” said the officer as they entered a spacious but gloomy banqueting-hall, “ here is the apartment where Margaret, " the beautiful sister of our gallant Francis “ the First, was married to Henry d'AI-“ bret king of Navarre, and grandsire to i( our present king.”

“ She was not only beautiful,” said the chevalier, but so celebrated for her ta-u lents, that she obtained the title of the “ tenth muse and the fourth grace.”

" And in this apartment,” continued the officer, “ had the present monarch an “ interview with his unfortunate queen “ and her mother.”

“ And if I recollect right,” said the chevalier, “ that cypress walk, which sheds “ such a gloom on these casements, was

310

THE NOVICE OF

“ planted by Catharine de Medicis, who ,f died in this castle.’'

They then proceeded to the apartment where the great duke de Guise had been assassinated by Catharine and her son Henry the Third. The bed he had slept in still filled a corner of the room, and the officer pointed with his sword to a board in the cedar floor, which was still crimsoned with the princely blood of the sufferer, while an air of gloomy magnificence reigned on every side. Imogen shuddered with horror 5 and, turning into another apartment, seated herself in an open casement, while the rest of the party went to visit the chateau Renegaud, where the cardinal de Guise was put to death by the murderers of his brother. The virtues, the talents, of these unfortunate victims of inordinate ambition and party hatred rushed to her mind, and the sufferings of the amiable duchess dc Guise for her gallant husband, to whom she was so tenderly attached, drew a tear to her eye, which swelled with a kindred drop of

ST. DOMINICK.

311

compassion when she called to mind the maternal anguish which rent the heart of the dowager duchess de Guise, who, in the poignancy of a mother’s feelings, as she embarked on the Loire, stretched her arm towards the castle of Blois, and exclaimed as it receded from her tear-stained glance (apostrophising the spirit of Louis the Twelth) :	Shade	of my royal grand-

ic sire! didst thou, O sainted king, erect cf those walls to be the sepulchre of thy descendants, the tomb of the murdered “ offspring of thy grand-daughter ?”

The eyes of Imogen were yet moist when the chevalier and the rest of the party returned j and, having walked through several apartments, and examined the various and curious devices painted on the windows or carved on the doors, accompanied by their guide and a few officers of the garrison known to the chevalier and anxious to be known to the youthful lady de St. Dorval, they returned to the auberge to supper, and early the next morning they proceeded on their route to Paris.

312

THE NOVICE OF

CHAP. XXIX.

■------Canst thou bear wealth,

And pleasure’s meltingtoucb? Thou hast kuown virtue But at scanty board: she has wak'd with thee To chilling vapours in the midnight vault,

And beckon’d thee to hardships, tears, and penanee. Wilt thou acknowledge the divine instructress When syren pleasure wraps thee In delight ?

Walpole.

Les amours dessinoient ses pas,

La volupté suivoit ses traces.

Les plaisirs animèrent ses graces.

Et s’entrelacèrent entre ses bras.

De Moustier.

NOTWITHSTANDING the pleasure and instruction Imogen had derived from her delightful and interesting journey, her heart bounded with joy when she found herself within the gates of Paris. It was dark when they arrived, and the pleasures of fancy and expectation were not damped

ST. DOMINICK.

313

by that disgust narrow, dirty, and gloomy streets, succeeding to the charms of nature, 'would have inspired on her first view of that great and populous city. The hotel de St. Dorval lay in the Fauxbourg St." Germaine. It was a vast and ancient structure, surrounded by a large square court and a high wall. The maître cVhotel, who had hired a suite of servants on the receipt of the chevalier’s orders, and who had every thing in readiness for the reception of his lady, received her at the gate, accompanied by the rest of the domestics, with each a torch in his hand. The hotel was brilliantly illuminated, and an elegant supper served up immediately on the arrival of its mistress, and Imogen, for the first time appearing in the character of a hostess, mingled with the spontaneous cordiality of an affectionate welcome the polished graces of the most wakeful attention. The chevalier and his sister accepted of apartments for that night at the hotel de St. Dorval, and, notwithstanding a

VOL. HI.

o

THE NOVICE OF

pressing invitation, removed the next day to their respective houses. The morning after her arrival was entirely devoted by the delighted and busy Imogen to the examination of her house, furniture, equipages, and all the innumerable and splendid et cœterci which fill up the train of rank and opulence : but her house, though vast, was Gothic; her furniture, though magnificent, was cumbrous and antique; the carriages, according to the account of an old coachman, who had served two generations in her family, had not been drawn out since the coronation of Charles the Ninth, and were a species of litter, whose rich ornaments and gaudy trappings had lust their splendor in the lapse of time ; while her train of domestics, with the exception of the old family coachman, was the only modern articles in her establishment.

Imogen, while she was highly amused with the Gothic character of every thing around her, gave boundless scope to taste

ST. DOMINICK.

315

and fancy in the revolutions she began to plan and the improvements she meditated. In the midst of that delightful flurry of spirits which new and pleasing objects and sensations ever awaken in the mind of the gay and youthful, Imogen was caught by her guardian, who came to pay her an early visit.

“ You see,” said she, linking her arm through his as they rambled through the apartments, " how busy you find me, but I am now only busy in speculation.”

And when are your projects to be f< realised?” said the chevalier laughing.

“ Why, with all possible expedition ; <e but you must lend me your assistance. “ I must have workmen and workwomen of every description; artists and me-<e chanics, projectors and executors, all 4t must contribute their powers to the re-" volution I mean to effect. In short, my ff dear sir, I am going to dispossess the “ usurper Gothic Inelegance of her throne,

316

THE NOVICE OF

“ and restore Taste to her rightful cm* " pire.”

“ But then, my dear lively Imogen, are “ you not aware of the danger of sudden “ innovation in every system ? and that “ even the efficient cause of the best change in antiquated error frequently becomes itself the first victim of revolu-ec tionary influence?”

“ But, my dear cautious guardian, if a “ probable danger were always to operate “ as a sufficient determent from effecting “ a certain good, what becomes of that tf glorious band of self-immolated spirits

" who-----”

Well well,” interrupted the chevalier, kissing the hand that pressed his arm, “ J am too anxious to agree with you on every point to oppose your arguments “ on this; only remember this, that in every scheme, whether public or private, trivial or important, prudence forms the “ firmest basis of success. And now we will change the subject. I have received

ST. DOMINICK.

317

sc a letter from your amiable conqueror of Laon.”

Imogen started, changed colour, and quickened her pace as they walked on.

“ I had occasion to write to him/’ continued the chevalier, on a business very “ near my heart, and to which his influence “ and interest were essentially necessary. “ He has with his usual generosity pro-“ mised me both, although his present si-“ tuation prevents his immediate exertion “ of either/’

His 'present situation ?” faintly exclaimed Imogen.

“ Since his marriage,” continued the chevalier, amiable in his domestic as “ great in his public character, he has liv-ed entirely with his family at the cha-teau de Montargis in Provence, except “ when in his military capacity he has been obliged to attend the king; for all “ his court places he has resigned, in spite cc of his majesty’s solicitude to keep him " always near his person. He is now di-

318

tllE NOVICE OF

“ viding his tenderest attention between “ his father and his wife. The former, “ the victim of inordinate and disappoint-ed ambition, oppressed with bodily as “ well as mental disease, is hurrying fast ts from a world whose ostentatious no-“ things so entirely engrossed him; and the baroness de Montargis is on the cc point of becoming the most sacred, the c< most important of characters—a mother. “ Thus writes the baron de Montargis. " But his letter is dated three ?nonths “ back; and it was sent to me by hand to “ Italy, and forwarded again from thence “ here.”

Imogen involuntarily drew her arm from the chevalier’s, and sat down on a fauteuil; the chevalier followed her example, and a pause of a minute ensued.

In the train of alluring expectations which beckoned Imogen to France, a hope scarcely understood, a wish scarcely defined^had insidiously stolen. She dare not, she did not, confess even to herself.

ST. DOMINICK.

319

that hope,, that wish, was once more to behold the minstrel of Provence ; yet, when rapture hung' upon the witchcraft of her song, when applause retraced the magic of her pencil, and celebrity blazoned forth her genius and lier talents, her vanity swelled to the triumph, her ambition attained its gaol, but her heart, unmoved, untouched, weighed the plaudits of the world in the scale of comparison with one glance of rapturous approbation from the eye of him she had loved, and the world and its plaudits wTere but a feather in the balance. The intelligence theiefore that the baron de Montargis was settled in Provence carried with it something of disappointment which her reason disowned, but which her soul felt; and the sudden mention of his name, a name so dear, so grateful, and so long denied her ear, caused a momentary convulsion of the heart, whose irritation was lulled by the sentiments awakened by a few talismanic words. “ The baron de Montargis eu-

320

THE NOVICE OF

<f gaged in the sweet, the sacred, the ten-“ der duties of a son, a husband, a father !” mentally, fervently repeated Imogen. The image of the young, the blooming minstrel disappeared. She turned round and looked at the chevalier ; his eyes full of tenderness were fixed on her : her heart acknowledged the appeal; in a moment she was all herself, and with a calm smile said : “ Any new trait of perfection in the “ character of the baron de Montargis “ pleases without surprising me ; for is he “ not the friend of my friend !” and she put her hand endearingly into that of the chevalier, while something like a pang of self-accusation smote her heart when she felt it treasured a secret concealed from him who ought to be the master of all its movements ; yet the inefficacy of its revelation, independent of the vow pledged to the baron, reconciled her to what now appeared a laudable and delicate simulation. The chevalier pressed the hand clasped in his with tenderness; a sudden

ST. DOMINICK.

321

agitation shook his frame ; he arose, took a few turns lip and down the room, and, again seating himself by his ward, a general conversation took place ; and Imogen having engaged him and his sister to spend the day with her, as she meant to remain incog, until she had made arrangements for appearing in public, her guardian took his leave.

When we determine on being virtuous we always are so. The spring of tender recollection, though now touched, did not, as it was wont, overflow the bosom of Imogen with the boundless tide of passion. She now had the power of placing limits to its course, for still she repeated : cf The “ baron de Montargis is a husband, a fa-ff ther, and I on the point of becoming ff the wife of another/’ She did not, as she had once done, call in the auxiliary of reason to subdue tenderness; for, dangerous is the result of those arguments the understanding holds with the passions and the heart. Imogen did wiser; she fled o 2

322

THE NOVICE OP

from the intrusion of thought. All the remaining evening was devoted to the society of the chevalier and madame de Rosemont, and when she arose the next day the elegant speculations of taste chased away the dangerous speculations of the heart.

The valuable spoils of art which Imogen had borne away with her from Italy had all safely arrived, the hotel de SL Dorval was filled with workmen of every description, and the best artists and projectors Paris afforded were employed.

In sentiment the lady de St. Dorval had got in advance with her species; her ideas were those of enlightened ages yet to come, but her (aste was antiquated, for it was truly Attic. She looked at the hotel do St. Dorval, where every thing was equally inimical to elegance and convenience. She thought of the dwelling of Pericles and Aspasia, and believed that the union of taste and accommodation was not impracticable. The rich but airy folds of Grecian drapery displaced the curious but

ST. DOMINICK.

323

heavy workmanship of the Gobelins ; the cumbrous and immoveable fauteuils were deposed in favour of the light and elegantly-formed stool, the canopied seat, or luxurious couch ; tables of massy strength and vast magnitude, curiously carved and gaudily gilt, were supplanted by slabs of Parian marble, supported by slender pillars twined with the vine’s golden foilage, and reflecting on their polished suface chandeliers of sparkling crystal ; looking-glasses lost in the immensity of their tarnished frames gave way to the Venetian mirrors, hung by the hands of the graces; while the antique lamp, suspended by rosy wreaths, usurped the place of heavy branches; and Etruscan vases shed from their bosoms the richest perfumes of the east; musical instruments of every description were dispersed through the apartments, or collected in a hall dedicated to Apollo, and filled with some of the best productions of statuary and painting.

To a library all ready well filled was

324

THE NOVICE OF

added the finest collection of modern English, French, and Italian, books; and some valuable medals, a collection of fine antiques, and a number of natural curiosities, presented her a few days after her arrival by the chevalier, were arranged with taste and judgment in the recesses which separated the bookcases ; while magnificence was every where chastened by simplicity and splendor by taste, and all that could allure to pleasurable enjoyment or tasteful and intellectual gratification, added to the social comforts of convenience and accommodation, was to be found at the hotel de St. Dorval. Every where the genius of its mistress was discernible; nothing was incongruous; the harmony of order, the uniformity of correct though fanciful taste, shed their influence on every side. In the speculation of magnificence Imogen had taken no account of expence. Hitherto a stranger almost to the use and entirely to the possession of money, she looked on her riches as

ST. DOMINICK.

325

inexhaustible, and expended them, as if in fact they were so ; and, while she gave a scope to her tasteful but extravagant propensities, one sentiment of humanity was still predominant above those of ostentation ; for she felt in pursuing her own gratification she was affording the means of subsistence to the poor and the industrious, and she therefore daily multiplied her workmen beyond the calculation of expence laid down by her projector, who had by no means limited his genius to any rule of moderation or economy. Meantime the chevalier beheld the extravagant progress of this domestic and tasteful revolution sometimes with a slight but friendly remonstrance, sometimes with a faint approbation, but never with any very obvious satisfaction. It was long before he could induce the delighted and always occupied Imogen to look over the accounts, which were hourly brought in by tradesmen, artisans, and mechanics; and she then to her amazement found they ex-

THE NOVICE OF

ceeded the large sums she had brought from Provence, and which she supposed would have nearly carried her through the winter’s campaign. To satisfy even the present demands she was therefore obliged to draw on the Parisian banker for a sum deposited in his hands by the late count.

This expenditure is immense,” said the chevalier gravely, “ considering that ff your residence here must be always very rf transient, according to your father’s will, u which, however opposed by inclination, “ will be ahvaysj/ozcr law, I am certain.” “ The expenditure is indeed great,” said Imogen seriously; 'f by far greater than I " imagined ; but, my house finished, I “ shall have little inducement to expence “ afterwards.”

The chevalier faintly smiled, and shook his head.

“ Besides,” continued she, “ I have not «c merely been led away by my own gra-“ tificaiion. My ability to do good is

ST. DOMINICK.

327

ct great, and the medium through which f( it now flows affords employment to the " industrious, while it relieves the indi-“ gent.”

" That such may have been your do-u minant motive, my dear Imogen, I do u not doubt. Society has now indeed "great and powerful claims on you; but f< in filling up the code of moral duties u let us draw a line of distinction between " those immediately connected with our-

selves and within the influence of our “ own sphere, and those we owe in ge-“ neral to the world ; and without arraign-“ ingyour benevolence in the present in-“ stance, suffer me to wish it had been u exercised in favour of some of your poor cc Provençal tenants rather than those who» " if they rank with the industrious, can " never be reckoned on the list of the in-“ digent, in a place where ostentatious “ luxury will always find employment for “ those who can contribute to its indul-

u

»>

gence.

32S

THE NOVICE OF

Imogen for a moment stood confused and silent, then with a forced smile said : iC Well you have convinced me that hu-“ m anil y was totally out of the question ; C; but you will at least allow there was an ci absolute necessity for a reform in the tl antiquated system of affairs here/’ ie Your grandfather, who chiefly re-cf sided here, and was a man of princely “ ideas and taste, did not think so,” said the chevalier drily.

“ Neither should I,” said Imogen sportively, “ if I were my grandfather.”

This little sally was only answered by a sigh, and the chevalier demanded when she meant to send her father’s letter to the duchess de Guise.

“ Oh ! as soon as you please novo,” replied she ; c for noie, should she deign to visit me, I shall not be afraid of losing “ sight of my illustrious guest in the som-“ hre shades of an immense arm-chair. " Now I am armed at all points for the “ critical review of Parisian taste and Cl judgment,”

ST. DOMINICK,

329

“ You will see nothing1 like this/' said the chevalier, looking round the elegant apartment in which they sat, “in all Paris.’" “ I hope not/’ replied Imogen with a triumphant smile. Then, going to a magnificent escrutoir, over which was placed a beautiful marble statue of Silence, with her finger on her lip and a key suspended from her girdle, Imogen unlocked it, drew forth the letter of the count de St. Dor-val, and fixed her eyes on the superscription. While she fastened her lips on those characters traced by a hand once so dear, and now so cold, a tear dropt on the kiss, and hallowed its impression. The chevalier, taking the letter from her hand, imbued his lip with the precious dew of filial sorrow ; and gazing fondly at her he exclaimed :

Long o’er the transient pleasures that “ frolic in thy youthful breast may feeling Ct hold her empire ! and while the spring Cl of innocent enjoyment still flows to the “ touch of gay impressions, may the sa-

THE NOVICE OF

“ cred source of sensibility continue pure “ and unexhausted ! Oh ! lovely is the (( eye whose smile is brightened by a tear, ff like the arch of heaven’s promise when “ its living tints sparkle through the dewy “ shower that falls from its many-coloured “ bow !”

The chevalier, after a long and affecting pause, then promised to wait immediately himself on the duchess de Guise, to whom he was slightly known, and shortly after took his leave.

When he returned from the hotel de Guise he called on Imogen, to assure her of the duchess’s anxiety to receive her, with a pressing invitation to her grace’s lever* the next day.

It was long since an interview with the

# To be permitted to attend the Itver and coucher of the ladies of illustrious rank, or of the royal blood, was then esteemed a mark of distinction. We find it mentioned as a kind of compliment by the great duke dé Sully, that the beautiful Gabrielle invited the duchess de Sully to fur lever.

ST. DOMINICK.

33 i

celebrated duchess de Guise had been looked forward to by Imogen with wishful anxiety; and to the interest which the duchess's own character had awakened was now added that which arose from her Jate visit to the spot where the husband and brother of this illustrious princess had been murdered; and emotion was flushed to its deepest glow when, alone and in a splendid equipage, attended by almost princely pomp, she arrived at the hotel de Guise. After having been announced, she was conducted through a suite of magnificent apartments to a large and elegant saloon. The gentleman in waiting introduced her to one of the duchess’s ladies’ companions, who in her turn introduced her to the princess. The duchess de Guise was seated at her toilet, but unengaged in its duties. She was in earnest conversation with a lady of dignified and grave deportment, who sat by her engaged with a small reel that hung from her girdle. When Imogen was announced the princess arose.

THE NOTICE OF

and embraced her with that fascinating cordiality which always distinguished her manners even beyond the boundary of nice discrimination ; then, turning* round, she took her alfectiobalely by the hand, and looking* at her for a moment with mingled curiosity and admiration, she said :

<f As an earnest of the friendship and “ affection I wish to shew the daughter of the count de St, Dorval, I beg leave to ‘/ recommend her in the strongest manner “ to the friendship and notice of the du-“ chess de Sully/*

The elderly lady arose, and, according to the custom of the times, saluted the young stranger ; and Imogen then found herself seated between the most celebrated woman and the wife of the most celebrated man of the age.

The duchess de Guise, reared in courts, and deeply skilled in the science of pleasing, always possessed the happy art of rendering her conversation delightful by making the concerns of her auditor its

ST. DOMINICK.

333

chief topic. When Imogen entered, she had been blazoning the virtues of the great de Sully to the greedy ear of the duchess ; and she now turned the stream of discussion to the character, the virtue,, and the talents, of the count de St. Dorval. She called him the unalienable friend of her martyred lord, and the steady adherent to the cause of her persecuted son, whose delivery from the castle of Jours she said he had in part effected. She talked of the beauty of madame de St. Dorval, whom she had once seen at the court of Florence, with admiration, and of her 6tory (which she said made a great noise) with feeling and compassion ; while, on the virtuous and venerated character of de Sorville, she touched with an arch smile that called a blush into the cheek of Imogen. The conversation was now interrupted by the entrance of three young ladies splendidly dressed, and all eminently beautiful. The first, who greatly bore awaj^the palm of loveliness from her lovely companions, the

224

THE NOVICE OF

duchess introduced to Imogen as her daughter,* and the other two as the ladies d’Entragues and de Beuil.f Mademoiselles de Guise and de Beuil had just returned from the Louvre, and the conversation turned on the court. The levée had been splendidly attended ; several foreigners of distinction had kissed the king’s hand, who appeared in great spirits, and his beautiful mistress, the duchess of Beaufort, had appeared in all the splendor and received all the homage of a queen. Imogen involuntarily sighed, and thought of the solitary castle of Usson. The conversation rested principally with mademoiselle de Beuil, whose animated details, witty sallies, and talent for caricature, kept the smiles of her auditors in constant play; while mademoiselle de Guise, not

* Louise de Lorraine, afterwards princess de Conti.

f Afterwards the marchioness de Verneuil, and the countess de Moret, the successive favourites of Henry the Fourth.

ST. DOMINICK.

335

less witty, was less loquacious, and seemed engaged in examining the person of Imogen ; and over the lovely countenance of the silent d’Entragues the gloom of disappointment and mortification hung its shadow. The duchess de Sully now arose, and offered the two young ladies a seat in her litter, who, looking over a list of visits they had to make, accepted the proposal ; but before they departed they embraced Imogen, and, requesting the honour of her acquaintance, assured her they would take the earliest opportunity of waiting on her at the hotel de St. Dorval, which they said would be assailed by visitors the moment it was known her doors were open.

Although,” said mademoiselle de Beuil, “ the magical mysteries of your “ fairy palace are by no means so secret “ as you may imagine, all Paris is on the

tiptoe of expectation to wonder and ad-“ mire.”

When the ladies were gone, Imogen, who felt herself hound by a spell to the all-

THE NOVICE err

attractive duchess, with difficulty attempted to withdraw; but the duchess, taking both her hands, said :

£f For heaven’s sake, you, who appear so superior to the world in every re-spect, rise above its idle forms, and give me your society for the rest of the “ day. My son is gone to Fontainbleau “ with the king, and I shall shut my doors “ against all visitors, provided you repay <e me for the sacrifice by the pleasure of tc your company/'

" The consciousness of the happiness fC you confer by obliging me to stay,” said Imogen smiling, “ must be the reward of your self-denial.

Since Imogen had been first initiated into the pleasures of social intercourse, in the calendar of delightful moments which

she had rescued from time’s dull round,

* . ' *

none had flown by on a more rapid wing than those which she enjoyed during the rest of the day. Always delightful when she wished to delight, always bewitching

ST. DOMINICK.

337

when she wished to infatuate, stimulated by that sympathy of taste and mind which existed between the fascinating* duchess de Guise and herself, and by the flattering encomiums which hung upon the exertion of her versatile powers, her talents for conversation, and her extraordinary musical abilities, were alternately exerted to entertain her illustrious hostess, and always exerted with success.

Mademoiselle de Guise, not less witty and still more beautiful than her mother, nurtured on adulation, and living only while she imbibed it, yet obliged by her mother’s request to pass one evening without presiding at the shrine where countless votarists were wont to pay their homage, and at that critical period deeply engaged in an affaire du cœur with the celebrated marquis de Bellegarde, master of the king’s horse, yawned away the hours on a couch, or faintly touched the strings of her lute, while she smiled applause rather than pronounced it on tfoe

VOL. III.	p

33S

THE NOVICE OF

lively sallies and original thoughts of her lovely guest.

In the course of the evening the duchess,, with maternal freedom, spoke of Imogen’s union with the chevalier deSor-ville, which she said her father had mentioned in his letter as a matter nearest to his heart ; and though she allowed her rank and opulence might have entitled her to a more splendid alliance, independent of her youth, beauty, and accomplishments, which were in themselves sufficient to secure the gratification of the most ambitious views, yet she believed in the scale of happiness Imogen would attain the highest degree, by uniting herself to the most virtuous, the most intelligent, and most generally-esteemed man of the age. Imogen’s only comment on this remark was a sigh ; and mademoiselle de Guise thought of the handsome gallant marquis dc Bellegarde, and smiled at her mother’s sober ideas on love and matrimony.

The duchess then mentioned the neces-

ST. DOMINICK.

339

sity of Imogen’s appearing immediate!' at court, whither she would herself conduct her^ and in the mean time promised to mention her to the king in a manner likely to procure her the warmest reception, and to do away any little prejudice which might float in the mind of his majesty against the daughter of one of the most obstinate and factious of his nobility.

‘‘To-morrow/’ said the duchess, “I “ follow the court to Fontainbleau, where ff I shall have an opportunity of speaking if to the king in your favour. We shall <e return the next day, and on the follow-<f ing a court will be held, when I shall “ have the honour of presenting the most “ charming of women to the most amiable “ of monarchs.”

It was late when Imogen returned home, yet she found the chevalier there before her. He was walking up and down the hall when she entered it, and sprang forward to receive her with a glow of pleasure animating his countenance.

TIIE NOVH’.E OF

As he led her into the parlour he said : “ You will smile at my folly when I tell “ you that I have been three times here in “ your absence, and that without being iC uneasy at its length. I could not divest <c myself of some little anxiety not to be “ defined, though easily to be felt. In <( short, now that I behold you thrown “ upon this great, this dangerous world, I fc feel like a mother, when for the first time she trusts the infant treasure of her “ heart from her supporting hand, and views its unassisted tottering motions with mingled pleasure and apprehen-“ sion.”

Or like a boy,” said Imogen smiling, who gives his captive bird as much li-“ berty as the string fastened to its leg “ will admit, then, trembling for its es-cape, longs to draw it back to his bo-som’s prison.”

“ His bosom's prison /” repeated the chevalier, with a melancholy smile. Ah, “ Imogen ! that tender expression has

ST. DOMINICK,

341

“ saved 7722/ feelings and your humanity ; “ for though I would not be thought to *' hold you in captivity, yet in my bosom’s “prison I would indeed willingly confine y you.”

“ But,, my dear friend,” interrupted Imogen endearingly, “ though the little “ bird will at first flutter and expand its “impatient wing, and sport delighted in “ its transient freedom, yet from habitual “ affection it will at last voluntarily seek “ its captivity, and fly back to the enslav-“ ing hand whose caresses are become ne-“ cessarv to its happiness.”

rfYes, from habitual affection, Imo-(C gen,” said the chevalier with a profound sigh ; “ but where the heart seeks the vo-“ luntary glowing impulse of the kindred

“ heart-----”

“ I wish,” said Imogen, with affectionate simplicity, yet apparently hurt, “ I could say or do any thing to please “ you.”

The chevalier took both her hands, and kissed them with ardour.

342

THE NOVICE OF

<f My beloved Imogen !” lie tenderly exclaimed, “ every thing you say, every “ thing you do, pleases me—pleases me iS but too much. I am only mortified that fc I cannot catch the magic art from you, “ and awaken- admiration commensurate “ to that I feel. But I am feeling, I am “ talking, with the folly of a romantic cf boy ; forgive, forget it. Let the gene-ef ral self-denial which rules my conduct “ atone for this temporary dereliction from reason and prudence. And now, my ft little fluttering bird, that you are re-(< turned to the enslaving hand whose ca~ ct resses (sweet thought !) are become ne-ff cessary to you, let me have some ac-count of your wanderings.”

Imogen, whose elastic spirits, whose susceptible feelings, were alive to every impression, opposed the tear which swelled in her eye with the smile of frolic pleasure that played on her lip ; and, delighted to have the pleasant circumstances of the day recalled to her mind, she burst into a

ST. DOMINICK.

343

torrent of rapturous praises on the character of the duchess de Guise ; dwelt with the liveliest admiration on the manners, sweetness, and affability, of the young ladies de Guise, de Beuil, and d’Entragues ; and mentioned madame de Sully with that interest her being the wife of one of the greatest men of the age awakened.

Madame de Sully,” said the chevalier, is perhaps the most truly amiable, ff though by much the least attractive, the ie least fascinating character of any you have mentioned.”

“My dear chevalier, you forgot the ft enchanting duchess de Guise is of the number.”

The duchess is indeed, Imogen, an “ enchantress ; she is even a very amia-fî ble, I might almost say a great charac-<f ter ; but still she is the woman of the “ world, and lives only in a court of which “ she once hoped to have been the idol. ‘f Her daughter is too beautiful not to ex-

o

‘f cite universal admiration in one sex, and

344

THE NOVICE OF

“ consequently much envy in the other. “ Let us hope it is in this cause many ma-“ licious reports originate, which slander <f has freely circulated to her disadvan-<c tage, and which has faintly tainted her reputation without adducing one proof “ of the error of her conduct.”

“Good heavens!” exclaimed Imogen, fC you shock me.”

“ I would only warn you, my dear “ friend,” returned the chevalier ; “ and “ by abating the ardor of those sudden “ predilections, so natural to the warmth “ and inexperience of your character, “ teach you to distinguish the attractive “ and the good, the pleasing and the wor-<f thy ; for in that high class of society “ into which you will be now initiated “ they are by no means inseparably con-“ nected ; and, under the skilful opera-" tions of the great lapidary Dissimulation, “ you will find the worthless pebble wear «‘the same brilliant polish as the diamond.” “ This is a sorry lesson,” said Imogen

ST. DOMINICK.

345

smiling, " but I am sure a useful and a “just one. I am now almost afraid to <f mention mademoiselle d’Entragues, whose pensive character seems touched “ with the sentimental, and who, I con-<<r fess, greatly interested me.”

“ Sentiment,” said the chevalier, ff is “ not a characteristic she cither possesses a or affects, and what you took for pen-“ siveness was only mortification at hear-tf ing an account of those court gaieties 4t in which she could not participate; for “ neither she nor any of her family are “ admitted to court on account of some “ irregularities in the political conduct of ct her father and brother. Her character “ is formed of those unfeminine qualities,. “ ambition and enterprise. She is also “ artful where a point is to be attained on “ which her heart is set, and is so happy <« in concealing her defects, that few wo-“ men in Paris are more admired than the t( beautiful d’Entragues. As for made-u moiselle de Beuil, if so young a créa* p 2

346

THE NOVICE OF

“ ture can be said to have any character, hers is neither dangerous nor artful.— “ She is lively, piquante, and has already u obtained the character of a wit, which “ she is too anxious to preserve not to be cc in danger of losing- it.”

» ff But how have you become so well ac-l< quainted with the character of these <c young- ladies, my dear sir,” exclaimed Imogen, <f who are almost a stranger to Paris?”

“ My dearest Imogen,” said the chevalier smiling, true affection is endowed “ with a species of omniscience, for no-f£ thing connected with its object is un-known or indifferent to it. Ever since I came to Paris, I have been busied in (C making myself acquainted with the cha-ff racters which compose its circles of fashion, and especially of those which ff frequent the hotel de Guise, where I supposed you would be most intimate. “ The ladies d’Entragues and de Beuil, I found to be the favorites of made-

ST. DOMINICK.

347

“ moiselle de Guise ; and the possibility tc of their becoming your’s also, from the " fascination of their manners and viva-“ city, which so strongly resemble your “ own, induced me to enter minutely into “ their characters, lest a partial sympathy ft might betray you into a boundless and dangerous confidence.”

Imogen’s grateful and affectionate heart was deeply touched by this instance of friendship, of tenderness, this lively interest and watchful care of every thing that concerned her.

I am proud to confess,” said she, “ that I can make no acknowledgment for your goodness. Such affection as yours “ should awaken a feeling that mocks the “ power of expression, and it does awaken “ it; and trust me, my friend, that I look “ forward with a sweet and placid hope to “ that moment when your anxiety for your te ward shall repose on a boundless confi-

“ dence in the conduct of your----”

Imogen, blushingly and confused at the

THE NOVICE OF

impulsive dictates of her heart, abruptly paused. “ Of your zctfe” she would have uttered, but the word died on her lips.

The chevalier, transported, pressed her to his heart, and exclaimed:

“ This is all sufficient. I demand, T ce urge, nothing. Let me repeat, that to “ you the destiny of my love is consigned. rf It is enough that you will yet be mine ; “ but be it still reserved for thee to retard “ or to accelerate that blissful period/' The chevalier then arose, and, having promised to bring his sister to spend the following day with Imogen, took his leave.

The next day brought with it a crowd of visitors of the first fashion to the hotel de St. Dorval, whose wonder, admiration, and curiosity, were divided between the fairy palace and its fairy queen. Among the number were the ladies d’Entragues and de Beuil, w hose warm and infatuating professions of friendship and admiration insensibly undermined that basis of distrust and caution the chevalier had endea-

ST. DOMINICK.

349

Nourcd to lay in the mind of his ward. With insinuating familiarity mademoiselle d'Entragues invited herself to spend the evening with Imogen, whom she amused with a thousand anecdotes of fashionable life and fashionable characters, while mademoiselle de Beuil regretted an engagement prevented her a similar pleasure.

The following morning Imogen received a card from the duchess de Guise, intimating her intention of calling on her in the course of the day to conduct her to court. At the appointed hour the princess arrived in a carriage of state, accompanied by her daughter, and the old countess de Noirmontier; so famous for her gallantries, and for that beauty which, even in its decline, had conquered, but could not retain, the fickle heart of Henry the Fourth. The duchess and her companions spent a considerable time in examining the apartments of the hotel de St. Dorval, where every thing appeared curious from its originality, and attractive

THE NOVICE OF

from its novelty, independent of the taste and splendor which every where presided.

The duchess was in raptures, and, embracing Imogen, said she should have an altar raised to her as a presiding deity of taste. Mademoiselle de Guise affected her mother’s warmth, and the countess de Noirmontier shook her head, and said she recollected the hotel de St. Dorval a very different place in the time of her grandfather; for she was an enemy to innovation of any kind.

When they were seated in the carriage, the duchess complimented Imogen on the elegant simplicy of her dress, and said she did not despair of seeing the Grecian costume revived under the influence of her taste ; while the lady de Noirmontier, enveloped in a ruff and fardingale, seemed to admire her dress as little as she had done her furniture.

When they entered the state room of the Louvre, it was already full ; and as the presentation of the heiress of the late count

ST. DOMINICK.

351

de St. Dorval was expected, every eye was turned on the splendid little group of the duchess de Guise when she entered. At the gay and voluptuous court of Paris, where novelty was held at an equal estimate in the scale of admiration with beauty, Imogen, being the newest, was consequently the most attractive object of the hour; and as neither the king, the minister, nor the duchess de Beaufort, had yet appeared, the claims of interest did not interfere with those of curiosity. The duchess de Guise and her beautiful daughter, always attractive, were instantly surrounded : while those who came to gaze at the young stranger from mere curiosity were fascinated by admiration—an admiration not solely arising from her beauty, for Imogen could scarcely be said to enter the lists of competitorship with mademoiselle de Guise and many other ladies present, but the bright intelligence of her looks, the quick and frequent transition of her complexion, the extreme originality of her sylph-like

352

THE NOVICE OF

drapery, and the disinvoltura of her air. A grace so little known at the court of Paris, where formality still maintained her empire even in the precincts of licentiousness, operated like a spell on those whom perfection would have sated, but to whom variety was always captivating. Among the splendid crowd that pressed round her, the wandering and bewildered gaze of the all-astonished^ all-delighted Imogen rested with pleasure on the form of the lovely little de Beuil ; who, proud to be distinguished even by an eye-beam from the cynosure of the moment, made her vray through the brilliant mob, and addressed her with her usual animation and warmth.

<c My charming friend/* she exclaimed, “ I have been watching for one look of <f invitation from you this hour. You are " certainly the most enviable creature in.

the world.”

“ And why the most enviable ?” demanded Imogen.

“ Merely, my dear, because you are the kf most admired.”

ST. DOMINICK.

353

Modesty and triumph might have disputed the deep blush that mounted to the. cheek of Imogen.

“ And I should envy you still more,” continued the lively little courtier,, " but Cf that I was once the wonder here myself ; and that my wonder was at an end be-fore three days, merely because a newer " face with higher rank made its appear-“ ance. But here comes one who will al-" ways attract the dear disinterested world ** until she ceases to attract him on whose “ nod it is dependent ; that is, 1 mean the “ icorld at the Louvre.

Attended by a splendid retinue, and dressed with imperial grandeur, the fair Gabrielle, duchess de Beaufort, made her appearance ; and Imogen for the first time beheld the most beautiful woman of the age, and who for so many years had obtained a boundless influence over the heart of her royal lover.

The crowd which had surrounded the shrines of the duchess de Guise and other

THE NOVICE OF

popular deities of the day, now all flew to the idol of the world's universal worship ; and the duchess and her party, deserted except by a few foreign officers of distinction, strolled to another end of the apartment, and took possession of a seat. No one looked surprised at Imogen, while mademoiselle de Beuil, laughing heartily, said: “ There goes the true spirit of a court : “ this is no bad lesson for a novice. But <f here comes a cavalier whose homage “ would not be the least unacceptable to “ the duchess de Beaufort, if she dared to “ receive it.”

“ What ! that gentleman in the blue ff cloke and black feathers ?” demanded Imogen.

No: he in the scarlet and gold; he <f who is the handsomest man in the room, iC or indeed in the kingdom; the marquis ff de Bellegarde, master of the horse, and “ once the favourite of the fair Gabrielle, ec till he resigned in favour of his royal “ master. Remind me to tell you of a

ST. DOMINICK.

355

cc curious anecdote of an unlucky rencon-44 tre between him and the king at the 4f chateau de Courcy, where the fair Ga-“ brielle resided with her father, in the 44 first era of her connexion with his ma-<f jesty. You may depend on its authen-" ticity, for I had it from mademoiselle db ff Guise ; and she, I can tell you, is good ff authority for any thing concerning the “ marquis, or the world does her wrong*.* “ But pray look at her since the master of “ the horse entered. Yes, she will cer-ce tainly break that little etuis in pieces— “ no ; it is safe, for here comes the mar-ee quis.”

The marquis de Bellegarde now approached, and seated himself by the younger lady de Guise, with whom he con-

* Mademoiselle de Guise, in her Mémoires de la Cour de Henri Quatre, mentions a truly-dramatic incident which happened at the hotel de Courcy, and n which the kin" and the marquis de Bellegarde were the principal actors.

THE NOVICE OF

tinued to converse in a kind of murmur: while Imogen, delighted with the vivacious and entertaining powers of her new friend, endeavoured to change the conversation 3 and observing an elegant looking man, whose countenance beamed with i itelligence as he conversed with two gentlemen who stood near them, she inquired his name.

“ What, that piquant-looking cavalier “ in green and gold, and the order of le e( Saint Esprit suspended from his neck?” demanded mademoiselle de Beuil, twinkling her bright eyes at the object of their observation, and receiving a responsive glance of scrutiny with the utmost non-chalance.

cc The same,” said Imogen in a low voice, and casting down her eyes to avoid those which were now fixed on her blushing face.

“ Oh! that is the marquis de Sancy, colonel of the Swiss guards, and one of the king's favourites, though not equally

ST. DOMINICK.

35?

et fortunate with our monarch's monarch; <e for in many of his pasquinades he has “ given the fair Gabrielle no quarter. iC Every one likes to keep well with de iC Sancy, for he has as much wit and more “ independence than any of the fashion-able satirists of the day; for you must “ know,, my dear, that in a certain circle “ all these things go by fashion, and he 4e whom the omnipotence of popularity (t has once stamped as a wit may take out *1 a letter of licence to play the fool all the rest of his life. That tall handsome “ man conversing with him is the lord high constable de Montmorency; who, “ though not long married to the daugh-“ ter of the viscomte de Portes, the beau-“ tiful Louisa de Budos, thinks more of “ every man’s wife than his own ; and yet “ he is a mere méchant par air. But gal-“ Tantry is the order of the day; and the duke de Montmorency has not the cou-“ rage, though he may have the inclina-“ tion to be singular. Pray observe that

358

THE NOVICE OF

“ little lady-like gentleman who has just ff joined them! it is the young marquis de “ Chateauneuf. Ah! he observes a new " face. Foi* heaven’s sake do not blush “ so, or you will be instantly registered in his book of conquests.”

Imogen indeed blushed deeply, for the group to whom her attention was now directed consisted of those identical persons who had intruded on her privacy in thé camp of Laon. Their names, as repeated by the little page, she perfectly recollected ; but as no glance of recognition lurked in those eyes now earnestly fixed on her in the gaze of curiosity and fashionable confidence, she hoped the slight view they had obtained of the captive of Laon Was too imperfect to render it possible they should recognize in the lady de St. Dorval the prisoner of the baron de Montargis ; while she involuntarily smiled at the whimsical coincidence which had brought the same persons together to gaze on her at the door of her prison-tent and in the state-chamber of the Louvre.

ST. DOMINICK.

359

The marquis de Sancy now advanced towards her party, and, having paid his compliments to the duchess de Guise, requested the honour of an introduction to her noble and lovely protégée, which he instantly obtained; and mademoiselle de Beuil, seeing a fair occasion offer itself for paying her homage to the duchess de Beaufort, resigned her place by Imogen to de Sancy. Imogen, who feared the intruder of Laon, and dreaded the most indépendant satirist of the court, entered with a timid and bashful reluctance into conversation with her nçw companion ; until, fascinated by the insinuating polish of his manner, by that vein of humour which in some respects accorded with the natural playfulness of her own disposition, and finding it almost impossible to be shocked by the poignant severity of the observations the various groups around him elicited, but which were played off with all the ease of a light and frolic wit, she at first listened and smiled, then admired.

360

THE NOVICE OF

and at last participated in his humorous sallies, or replied to them with a spirit not inferior to his own ; until, flattered into self-approbation by the pointed attentions of a man of his distinguished talents, and stimulated rather than dazzled by the brilliancy of his conversation, she gave boundless scope to that naïveté of manner, that style of animated energy and curious felicity of expression, with which nature had so liberally endowed her, which education had not repressed, and which frequently gave the apparent lustre of wit to the more playful sallies of subtle and gay imagination.

The marquis was, or appeared to be delighted with every thing she said.

" I foresee,” said he, “ that you will c( never be suffered to die a natural death “ among us; for Envy, that severe Thales-“ tris, will fly from rank to rank among her cohorts, arming every hand against you, and exhorting her earth-sprung myrmi-“ dons to spare no beauty of mind or pes-

ST. DOMINICK.

361

<r son, but put every charm, every grace, “ to the sword.”

“ Then,” I am afraid,” said Imogen laughing, rf that Envy, like (he heroes of ancient romance, will combat a chimcera cs for a being of real existence.”

ff Why, 1 confess,” said tire marquis, “ she will have to engage with some ma-“ gical illusions, but she will always find ,f enough of charming and substantial evils " to glut her vengeance. Already I see her troops drawn out in battle array. “ The stupid young beauties who com-“ pose her battalion will fall on the bright fC intelligence of those looks, the preju-diced old ones will attack the naïf ori-“ginality of those bewitching manners, “ and the professional wits of the other “ sex, who even in woman never pardon ee those talents which surpass their own, will harass you like skilful archers in the rear, and point their arrows at that “ fair head whose external beauties con-“ stitute the least of its charms.”

VOL. III.	Q

362

THE NOVICE OF

Then, from you, my lord,” said Imogen gaily, as the most renowned chief “ of this last-mentioned dangerous pha-“ lanx, let me supplicate and receive mer-“ cy. Unequalled as well as unsurpas-“ sed, to harass an unresisting enemy were <s but to call your generosity in question.” The marquis bowed low. “ A compli-" ment from you,” said he, “ reminds me “ of the dart presented by Diana to Pro-Cc cris, which always reached the heart it was aimed at, yet always returned to “ the hand from whence it flew; since the 66 manner in which you praise the excel-“ lence of another best proves its exist-“ ence in yourself.”

In such little pointed and graceful gallantries, which possessed more in style than matter, passed away half-an-hour ; when the marquis de Chateauneuf again took his place opposite Imogen, and the marquis deSancy asked her if she was acquainted with the owner of those unmeaning orbs then fixed on her, “ who looks,” he added

\

ST. DOMINICK.	362

laughingly, ff like an Arabian manuscript, ce all flowers and gold.”

“ Without one legible character in the “ whole work, I suppose,’* said Imogen, “ except what the title-page presents, and (C there we read my lord marquis de Cha-cf teauneuf to all intents and purposes.” ff Admirably hit off!” said de Sancy laughing. “ De Chateauneuf* certainly is the most pompous solemn coxcomb cf on our court-list of important frivolity. te A courtier from his cradle, and of course “ a hypocrite, though a harmless one, he ,c is under a perpetual exertion to hide the ** deficiency of his mind, and the incon-<f sequence of his character, beneath the “ veil of affected gravity and serious gri-mace. You will meet with many such “ ephemeral things in this great museum “ of a world; these splendid insects, whom C( the naturalists in characteristics would “ class with the genus of the large blue

* For an account of this young nobleman, see Mémoires de Sully.

364

THE NOVICE OF

“ buzzing- fly, the most useless and self-“ important thing in the creation.”

Here the theme of de Sancy’s remark, probably suspecting the nature of his conversation by the keen glance of his eye, walked away.

“ You see,” said Imogen, fearful that cle Chateauneuf had overheard them, and equally unwilling to give pain to the mind of another as to repress the awakened gaiety of her own, “you see, my lord, “ you have chased away your buzzing in-“ sect.”

“ And I rejoice at it,” said the marquis, for as the fairest fruit attract the flies, <É I was apprehensive he would have di-u rected his flight hither. But now the tc disquisition of the naturalist is over, “ here comes subject matter for the anti-“ quarian. Pray observe that group of “ female antiques, which looks like the “ Fates cut in bronze. They were the “ three most celebrated beauties of the u old court 5 and as they thus bear about

ST. DOMÎMCït.

365

*• the ruins of their past splendor, form a “ kind of memento mori to the beauties of “ the new

(! Or living chronicles of other limes," said Imogen, which bring the sad truth “ to every female heart—f To this com-plexion must she come at last." ”

“ And whose sympathising infirmities/’ rejoined the marquis, " remind me of the “ social compact of the Gracea, who had “ but one eye and one tooth among them, of which (with sisterly accommodation) “ they made alternate use/’

Imogen, in spite of her good-nature, in spite of her humanity, struck more with the droll air of mimicry with .which this observation was made than at the ludicrous idea itself, burst into an involuntary fit of laughter; when turning aside her head, to conceal the impulse of risibility she could not restrain, she perceived the chevalier de Sorville standing close behind her, and apparently listening to the conversation which had passed, with a look that testified how little satisfaction he derived from its theme.

366

THE NOVICE OF

Imogen, though she expected to meet him at court, had not seen him enter; and his proximity at a moment when the desire to be brilliant preceded the wish to be amiable,, and her vivacity had got the start of her benevolence, covered her with confusion. Before she had the courage or opportunity to address him, he had walked away, and joined the duchess de Sully, with whom the marquis’s group of antiques were at that moment conversing. Notwithstanding this transient shade of chagrin, the gay de Sancy had again begun to interest her attention and call forth the scintillations of her vivacity, when the entrance of the king put a sudden stop to all general and private conversation.

His majesty walked up the room, leaning on the arm of the duke de Sully ; and conversing familiarly with Sebastian Zar-net, an Italian, and one of his chief favourites. Those adulatory attentions pointed by the various groups to the respective objects of their several devotions, were now all concentrated in the king; who became the

ST. DOMIXICK.

367

focus of those scattered rays of interested homage, which in his absence only fell on bodies of inferior attraction ; and the little train with which he had entered the audience-chamber soon accumulated to a multitude. So long had the wish of beholding this patriot monarch been buoyant in the heart and imagination of Imogen, that she was unable to trace back the moment when it awakened in her bosom; and the attractive brilliancy of de Sancy, the suspected displeasure of the chevalier, vanished from her thoughts as her soul-beaming eye pursued the form of the king. The graceful dignity of his air, the animated tints of his complexion, and the sweetness and expression of every lineament that formed the happiest countenance in the world, rendered bis person as interesting as his character. The simplicity of his dress was a satire upon the splendid fopperies of his courtiers; many of whom, he was wont pleasantly to say, carried their old woods on their backs. His coat and pourpoint of dark-grey cloth, his cloke of

36S

THE NOVICE OF

rose-coloured satin, andthesnowy plumage of his hat, for which he was always so remarkable, formed a striking contrast to the profusion of gold, silver, and jewels, that glittered on every side, and set off by its singular simplicity the imperial magnificence that breathed rcund the person of the royal wearer. With an air dignified though affable he received the homage of the court; and, at once witty himself and the cause of it in others, he elicited and returned a perpetual flow7 of brilliant repartee from the wits and humourists who surrounded him ; while he mingled among the ladies with a playful gallantry, that was grateful to each, though addressed to all. As soon as he observed the duchess de Guise, he approached and conversed with her for some time. As the duchess and her daughter had advanced to meet him, and were at some little distance from where Imogen stood, she could not overhear their conversation; but in a few minutes the duchess approached, took her hand, and, whispering a few words of encouragement

ST. DOMINICK.

369

in her ear, led her to his majesty. Imogen, blushing, trembling, and all emotion, was prevented bending the knee by the condescension of the king, who, taking her by the. hand, and gazing on her with looks of admiration, exclaimed:	Cousin

" de Guise, this is the most dangerous re-bel we have yet encountered. From “ such an insidious enemy as this there is “ no escape, since she conquers even in submitting.”

His majesty then endeavoured to draw Imogen into conversation, and spoke of Italy and the court of Florence, from which, he said, he understood she had lately returned. Imogen replied to his questions with a naif but timid simplicity, and with that original elegance of expression which was too natural ever to be relinquished even under the influence of the strongest emotions. The king testified his approbation not only by his looks but by the most flattering expressions, and then joined the duchess de Beaufort, to whom he devoted all hisattenlion while the levee lasted.

TUE NOVICE OF

370

Every eye had been fixed on Imogen during the king’s conversation with her, but the all-affectionate, all-anxious look of the chevalier was that which alone fixed her attention. She triumphed in his triumph, and lured him to her side with a a smile, when she was prevented from speaking to him by de Sancy and a crowd of the courtiers who pressed forward to be introduced to her. Among others, the duke de Guise was led by the hand of his beautiful sister, who whispered Imogen that her mother had commissioned her to engage her for the rest of the evening, as she expected a select party at the hotel de Guise, and added with an arch look, that her guardian was included in the invitation. The duchess de Guise was among the first to leave the court; and Imogen, whose spirits had attained to their highest pitch of elation, accompanied her home. The party at the hotel de Guise consisted chiefly of those to whom Imogen had been introduced, with the addition of mademoiselle d’Entragues and the marchioness

ST. DOMINICK.

3TÏ

de Belleisle, so celebrated for her beauty and talents, and the tragical sequel of whose life is so generally known. Early in the evening the high constable de Montmorency and mademoiselle d’Entragucs engaged Imogen at primero. It was in vain she declared she knew nothing of the game. Mademoiselle d'Entragues urged the indispensable necessity of learning ; and de Sancy, who still hovered near her, offered himself as her preceptor in the fashionable science. Not/' said he, as she seated herself at the table and he hung over the back of her chair/* “ that u I promise you success, although I will “ give you skill; for it is a proverbial tru-“ ism that chance never favoured those “ whom nature has highly endowed.— <c What, my lord high constable, are you “ going to engage with mademoiselle de “ St, Dorval at primero, and, like the an-“ cient Batavians, play away your liberty ?’* Cf De Sancy/* said the high constable, taking his seat at the table, tf your intre-

THE NOVICE OF

ic pidity of my stimulus. Where you have “ staked your heart with certainty of a “ loss, I will venture to risk my freedom.” <f Rather," said de Sancy, “ take warn-ing by my fate, and retreat while it is yet in your power.”

A ben trovaté floated on the lips and swam in the bright eye of Imogen, but her timid heart issued out a writ of commitment, and the crimson blush of modesty took prisoner the lively sally of her wit. Though yet a novice in the doctrines, dogmas, and formulas, of fashionable jargon, she was not unconscious of the gallant allusions uttered by its veterans ; yet she blushed that they were understood, and that blush betrayed her consciousness; but she soon learnt to receive the homage of the world without a blush, not as a voluntary donation, but as a just tribute. Less interested in the game than flattered by the adulation of the duke de Montmorency; more attentive to the brilliant sallies of de Sancy than to his precepts ; and engrossed

ST. DOMINICK.

378

at intervals with the gaiety and variety of the objects that flitted round her, Imogen lost every game with as little concern as she played it, until her empty purse warned her of her bankruptcy. Imogen coloured deeply when she found herself in debt without immediate power of defraying it; but the high constable, to whom she had lost, rose and said : “ It isl who am deeply ie your debtor for the happiest moments I “ever enjoyed;” and de Sancy, throwing his purse on the table, entreated to be considered her banker. At that moment the chevalier de Sorville, whom Imogen had lost sight of since dinner, stept up to her, and put his purse into her hand. Imogen’s warm blushes faded on her cheek; she turned round to thank him, but he had mingled in the crowd. “How supremely “ happy is the chevalier de Sorville,^ said de Sancy, who had watched her countenance during the whole transaction : “and “ yet, with all that philosophic equanimi-“ ty of his, he walks away as coolly as if

374

TUE NOVICE Of

“ he was insensible of the enviable pre-<c ference he enjoys.”

“ The chevalier is my guardian/* said Imogen eagerly.

“ Your guardian !” repeated de San-cy ; cc surely the charge consigned of the fC Hesperian dragon was less precious and “ less dangerous.”

Imogen, who had now in some degree awakened from her dream, and who, engrossed by the tender watchful anxiety of her amiable guardian, sought him every where with her eye, scarcely attended to the exhaustless adulation of the elegant de Sancy.

“ I perceive/’ said he, “ that, all per-cc feet as you are, you are still human, and c: that that object which is most desirable “ to you is not that immediately in your possession. Shall I recall that runaway “ guardian to you ?” And without waiting for an answer he flew to execute her wishes, which, though not breathed, he had traced in the anxiety of her counte-

ST. DOMINIC*.

375

nance. In a few moments be returned, and, leading the chevalier towards her, with a bow retired.

Hope and expectation brightened on the countenance of de Sorville as he seated himself beside her. “ Do you wish to ho-“ nour me with any commands ? said he.

cc Ah !” returned Imogen, “ it is not “ for me to command one who anticipates “ my wishes, and kindly acts for me where “ I am incapable of acting for myself. “ But this is not the place to express my " feelings. Here is the purse that you put cc into my hand. Pray seek the lord high “ constable, and discharge my debt ; it is, I believe, about a hundred crowns.”

“ Besides what you have already paid ?” said the chevalier rising.

“ Besides what I have already paid,” repeated Imogen blushing.

The chevalier went to seek the duke, and in a few minutes returned with the purse empty,

" I have obeyed you,” said he, “but

376

THE NOVICE, &C.

“ with some difficulty ; the duke seemed anxious to be your creditor.” The chevalier then informed her her carriage was in waiting.

“ I am glad of it/' returned Imogen, for I am almost weary even of pleasure.” . The chevalier only answered with a sigh; and Imogen, having paid her compliments to her illustrious hostess, presented her hand to her guardian, who conducted her to her carriage in silence.

“ I shall see you early to-morrow,” said Imogen as he shut the door.

<f If you wish it," returned de Sorville. ff If!'* repeated Imogen with a reproachful smile, and the carriage drove off.

CHAP. XXX.

--------E a die sorvite

Odoni di fortuna ? a che per voi Tanto sudar, se quando poi sdignato Il ciel con noi si vede Defendete si mal chi vi possiede ?

Metastasis.

THE following' morning Imogen rose late,, and, when she descended from her boudoir to the library> found the chevalier there before her. ff Thisis kind indeed/' said she, holding out her hand to him ; “ and yet I never wished, and never fear-“ ed more to see you—for I am sure you ff are displeased with me/’—Ci That as-surance, Imogen, argues a conscious-“ ness of your having given me cause.”

“ The conversation you overheard yes-tc day—”

A. Q

4

THE NOVICE OF

etf Pained me, Imogen, beyond expres-<( sion.”

“ And yet, my dear chevalier, ’tis so hard ee to resist, when—when—”

“ I understand you :—’tis so hard to re-“ sist the influence of example, and the “ opportunity of shining; to repress the i(jeu d'esprit which covers the malignity 44 of a personal reflection ; to chase from 44 the lip the b'on-mct which sanctions an “ ill-natured remark ; and to sacrifice il-44 liberal wit at the shrine of humanity and 44 benevolence.”

44 O sir, say no more ! Spare me, I en-44 treat; do not make me hate myself be-4J yond the power of ever regaining my w‘4 own approbation.”

“ No, my sweet friend, I do not wish to te make you hate yourself, but to render “ you the object of the world’s love as you 44 now are of its admiration, and to warn 44 you against the seducing allurements <4 which distinguished talents hold out to “ their possessors. Every one, Imogen, is

ST. DOMINICK.

5

“ not acquainted with the benevolence, <c the goodness of that sensible and tender “ heart, whose humanity would shrink fc from wounding the feelings of the most inconsequent being; but those severe sallies which the unguarded impulses of lively wit betray you into, those who are its objects will make the criterion ** by which your heart is to be judged, “ and though some may admire, the many will condemn, and all will fear you.— The ladies who were the subjects of the c( marquis de Saucy’s severe raillery yes-terday were the countesses de Noirmon-tier, de Sauves, and Dtizes, whose in-fluence at court has been long establish-“ ed, and the latter of whom I have the Cf honour to call a near relative.” Imogen started, and changed colour. sf She intends paying you a visit to day,” continued the chevalier ; and seems anxious “ to render you every service and atfcen-tf tion in her power.” Tears of self-condemnation swelled to the eyes of Imogen,

6

THE NOVICE OF

arid she raised them in silence, with a meek and deprecating glance, to the chevalier’s face. It is enough,” said he, touched with the eloquence of her looks, ef *tis i( enough, while contrition ever pursues “ the conviction of involuntary error, while “ the sweet tear of penitence pursues the “ blush of witty but illiberal triumph, I <c shall not fear for yon. Long may the “ goodness of your heart surpass the bril-cc liancy of your head, and your genius (C shine most conspicuous when exerting its divine efforts in the cause of huma-<c nity !” f£ Oh ! rather wish,” exclaimed Imogen, in emotion, <f that I may long be worthy the possession of your friendship, tc and that will include all I am most desi-ff rous of attaining'to.” The eyes of de Sorville glistened with pleasure; and, raising her hands to his lips, he gaily said, ‘c And now, my charming penitent, here tC ends my dictatorship for the day.”

“ Then you expect to resume it diur-nally, I suppose,” said Imogen ; " and that

ST. D0M1XSCK.	7

“ I, a Penelope in morals, shall undo every “ evening the web of reformation you have u assisted me to weave in the morning.”

The chevalier was about to answer in the same playful stile, when a crowd of visitors was announced ; and the chevalier, as was usual with him on such occasions, took his leave.

There is an influenza in fashion which, even the sobriety of judgment cannot resist; and if once the fantastic goddess reflects some favourite in her flattering mir-ror, the giddy multitude rushes forward on the tip-toe of expectation to behold, toad-mire, and to approve. The faith of the many reposes on the doctrine of the few; and the faintest respiration of fame receives a deathless echo from the babbling tongue of awakened popularity.

A week had only elapsed from the period of Imogen’s introduction at court, and that notoriety which even the secret ambition of the Novice of St. Dominick had panted to possess was now all her own.

s

THE NOVICE OF

That interesting, that piquant charm which breathed around her person ; those native and soul-born graces, more beautiful than even beauty itself; the splendor of her rank and fortune, and the brilliancy of her talents and acquirements, were at least sufficiently attractive to render her the object of general admiration, and to have given her a decided consequence in the high sphere in which she moved. But they carried not with them the magic influence to render her the object of tonish popularity, the cynosure of fashion, and the model of imitative inferiority. For, with every requisite to obtain celebrity, Imogen, like many others, was chiefly indebted for its possession to a whimsical coincidence of circumstances^ or to the self-love of those in whose hands the power of bestowing it was vested. The marquis de Sancy, flattered by the pleasure with which she hung upon his brilliant conversation„ and the compliments-which, in the unmodified ardor of her manner, she had paid

ST. DOM I KICK.

9

to his talents, and perhaps not indifferent to the charms of her person and genius, cried her up every where as a wit of the first order. The duke de Montmorency, whose sated heart found in her that novelty which alone had now the power to awaken a thrill on its languid pulse, established every where the fame of her beauty. And the king (to whom the duchess de Guise, in the kind policy of her friendship, had repeated many of those enthusiastic and rapturous expressions of admiration with which Imogen had dwelt on the character, the virtues, and talents, of her accomplished sovereign) spoke of her amiable originality, even in the presence of the fair Gabrielle*

In a short time, therefore, the hotel de St. Dorval became the constant resort of all that was most distinguished in Paris for rank, talents, or fashion. The gaiety, the freedom that reigned there ; the novel style of the entertainments, over which the Graces themselves seemed to preside 3

VOL. IV.	B

10

THE NOVICE OF

where Epicurus might have reveled,, and Plato have enjoyed the feast of reason ; together with the spell of fascination that lurked in the celebrity of its young and charming mistress; all contributed to render it the temple of refined and elegant pleasure, of rational as well as of fashionable amusement: while the constant society of madame de Rosemont afforded to the unrestrained conduct of the gay and volatile heiress a matronly sanction, and her engagements with the chevalier de Sorville an honourable protection and an inviolable safeguard.

The nature of her connection with her amiable guardian had soon become atopic of fashionable publicity and discussion; and as the disparity of their years, and apparently of their dispositions, rendered it generally believed their projected union was the result of family prudence or parental policy, it was a circumstance that rather allured than distanced the homage of gallantry ; and the youth and unguard-

ST. DOMINICK.

11

ed vivacity of its object hourly added to the number of its votarists by whom she was surrounded : while her enthusiastic admiration of genius and talents, her profuse and boundless liberality to those who possessed them, fmanyàof whom made professional claims to her taste and generosity,) soon obtained her the reputation of being the most distinguished patroness of literature and literary persons in Paris, and rendered her house equally the resort of prosperous merit and indigent genius.

De Servin, whose extraordinary and versatile talents, all wonderful as they really were, were still exceeded by the number and extent of his evil qualities $ who has been characterized by cotemporary writers as a miracle of genius and a monster of vice, and who united, in an eminent degree, all that adorns human nature to all that depraves it, found in his dazzling abilities an irresistible lure to the favour or the young lady de St. Dorval, who saw not beneath the most brilliant assemblage

12

THE NOVICE OF

of talents, and the veil of fascinating manners, a heart so vicious, that even that minor morality, the concomitant of taste and superior education, had failed to correct those strong traits of evil propensity Which rendered him daringly wicked or insidiously vile. And this profligate genius, whose depraved character had not yet unfolded itself to public observation, had the talent to extort the warmest admiration from the elegant taste of his generous benefactress, and the indelicacy to raise incessant contributions on her purse.

Colin, the courtly poet, who veiled in poetic drapery the amatory effusions of the king, who wooed his successive mistresses through the medium of his. harmonious numbers; Belleau and Ronsard, who could always so artfully diffuse the chastened charm of sentiment over those propensities and pursuits which rigid morality discountenanced, were among the most constant and welcome visitors of the hotel de St. Dorval.

ST. DOMINICK.

13

De Mempsel, the satyrist, who possessed the art of being agreeable as well as severe; D’Aubigné, the king’s écurie, whose conversation was fruitful in the happiest sallies, and whose social powers were not inferior to his literary talents, were delighted to preside at those attic suppers where Imogen herself appeared in the happiest of her phases. The old courtier de Rouquelaure, whose wit was as playful as it was harmless; the celebrated bishop of Rouenne, the companion of his youthful frolics ; Simon de Nicholas, the king’s secretary, so generally courted for the whimsicality of his manner; and Sebastian Zarnet, the elegant voluptuary, at whose festive table royalty itself delighted to unbend from the fatigues of the cabinet and the formalties of the court, frequently enlarged the circle at the hotel de St. Dor-val, which was adorned by all that Paris afforded of female beauty or female intelligence.

Imogen was too conscious of her musi-

THE NOVICE OF

cal excellence not to exert her influence in bringing the most charming of all the sciences into fashion ; and whilst her private concerts were among the first known at Paris, she liberally rewarded and publicly countenanced the professional musicians of the day. The celebrated Bussy D’Amboise, Davy du Perron, M. Des Portes, with many others of equal merit, if not with equal celebrity, contributed their fascinating powers to the pleasures of her elegant entertainments.

Meantime, among the many who affected to adore her genius, or who really admired her mental and personal accomplishments, the marquis de Sancy continued the most marked and most favoured in his attentions; while’ Imogen, gay, careless, and unguarded, neither encouraged nor rejected that species of homage which she soon perceived every woman of her acquaintance, whether married or single, exacted and received. The licentious manners which had long prevailed in France

ST. DOMINICK.

15

(and which a long course of civil wars had introduced) had relaxed many of those moral ties, which, though gradually reuniting under the influence of peace and progressive refinement, were still far from being firmly coalesced; and the libertinism of the day, sanctioned by the professed and boundless gallantry of the king, who continued to love

te Free and unquestioned in the wiles of love,”

boasted of holding its prerogative by royal authority. Imogen, but too secure in the almost infantine simplicity of her heart, insensibly glided into the popular manners of the day, influenced by the example of all who surrounded her, while the principles which accompanied this elegant levity were not only unknown, but unsuspected by her pure and virtuous mind. Among the women she had more rivals than intimates; and secret depravity with her never encouraged the risk of detection, through the unguarded effusions of boundless con-

16

THE NOVICE OF

fidence. And though, in the society of her male acquaintance, licentiousness smiled at the self-denying precepts of rigid morality; yet the society of man is never openly dangerous but to the females innately depraved or incorrigibly weak.— Imogen, therefore, thoughtless of evil herself, perceived not that it often lurked beneath the decent drapery of outward decorum, or concealed its features under the attractive mask of elegant blandishment and refined propriety.

The society which assembled at her house was indeed, in the eye of the world, unexceptionable : but the chevalier de Sorville saw not with the world’s eye. He alone trembled for the safety of his ward : —while others envied, he pitied; while others admired, he condemned; while others applauded, he reproved her. He beheld her surrounded by seducing dangers ; he saw her borne away by their magic influence; and with a secret mortification he discovered, that she, who in mis-

ST. DOMINICK.

17

fortune was a heroine, in prosperity was a mere woman, and that the native strength of her understanding was not only counteracted, but overwhelmed, by the vivacity of her temper, the fire of her genius, and the propensities of her taste. From the fairy visions of a glowing imagination, from the golden dream of the delighted senses, he repeatedly endeavoured to rouse her slumbering reason ; and her boundless expenditure, her indiscriminate liberality, her expensive pursuits, and extravagant establishment, were the frequent themes of the few private conversations the perpetual hurry of pleasurable engagements allowed her to grant him. Imogen sometimes answered his mild but firm remonstrances with playful raillery ; sometimes with a spirited opposition, that betrayed an independence of mind revelling from the curb of every restriction unimposed by its own native sense of right; and sometimes, when the heart obtained a momentary triumph over the passions, with that open b 2

THE NOVICE OF

ingenuous confession of her errors, and that lively regret for their commission, which almost expatiated the frailty it avowed, and convinced her solicitous friend that, in her abandonment of prudence, she still clung to the bosom of pure and unmodified virtue. It was during one of these interesting moments of self-condemnation, when contrite tears swam in her eyes, and vows of amendment floated on her lips, that de Sorville, though in the most delicate manner, hinted at the probable danger of her encouraging the pointed attentions of the marquis de Sancy, except she had the most unequivocal reasons for supposing them of a serious nature. Imogen started : this was a singular warning from the man who in a short time was to possess so sacred and inviolable a claim to her undivided heart ; and she involuntarily exclaimed,

Of the most serious nature ! Good God, sir ! what do you mean by so ex-‘f traordinary a caution ?”

ST. DOMINICK.

19

With a firm voice and dignified air de Sorville replied, “I mean, lady, to promote t( your happiness, even though its purchase is made by the sacrifice of my own.— This it is to truly love ; unworthy of the tc sacred name is that passion which self-ishly makes its own individual felicity " the object of its pursuit. Yes, Imogen ; lc I could resign you to another, though <f my heart broke in the effort ; but I will “ confess I should not wish that other was “ —Harlay de Sancy. In the flowery path of amatory dalliance few have ga-“ thered more laurels than your accom-“ plished friend. But, O Imogen ! that tf profound tenderness of which thy heart “ is capable, thy heart demands—that ever-(( renovating flush of passion thy ardent “ feelings require, and could bestow— “ dare you seek, dare you hope to find <f them in a connection with the dissipated “ de Sancy ?”

Imogen hid her face in her veil, while her heart secretly exclaimed, Where

THE NOVICE OF

ff dare I seek, where can I hope to find <r them ?”

Forgive me/’ continued the chevalier, affectionately taking her hand, if, in “ speaking from the dictates of my own feelings, I unavoidably wound yours ; but—”

“ Forgive }mu!” interrupted Imogen. “ Oh! all despicable as I must appear in your eyes, do not think quite so lowly of “ me as for a moment to suppose me in-sensible to the benevolence of your na-“ tore, or the magnanimity of your soul. e{ No ! heaven is witness that I esteem and “ reverence you above all human beings, and that that heart which you now be-“ lieve the prey of every folly, throbs not at this moment with a sentiment more 4-6 warm, more tender, more profound, than fc that with which you have inspired it.” My sweet friend,” exclairrled the chevalier in great emotion, while delight’s warm, beam illumined his countenance, “ my sweet friend, this is too much—it is

ST. DOMINICK.

21

<s even more than I meant to exact from C£ you. I did not indeed for a moment be-“ lieve de Saucy had touched your heart; Cf for, O Imogen ! I fear—I feel—the great, “ the profound emotions of which that ten-<f der sensible heart is capable, lie yet tor-(i pid and unawakened. But to your ac~ “ tive and ardent disposition some object “ of interest is indispensably requisite ; “ and he who failed in vanquishing your heart has captivated your imagination. O Imogen ! you are not formed for the world in which you live; and even in s( the midst of all the pleasurable but “ empty enjoyments it can bestow, you £f are all, all the slave of your imagina-ef tion : you are bewildered, but you are not satisfied ; you are intoxicated, but £f you are not happy.” With these word?, and obviously agitated, the chevalier kissed the hand he held, and hastily retired.

“ I am not happy/'repeated Imogen to herself; I am not indeed happy !” and she burst into tears. ft O de Sorvüle !

22

THE NOVICE OF

<c how cruel is the effect of that solicitude “ which urges you to tear the veil from “ the heart whose feelings and whose a wants I would hide from myself ; to avva-tc ken me from that dream of peace in “ which I blindly reveled, and touch upon €C that bosom-chord where all my joys and “ all my sorrows hang!” It was now for the first lime since Imogen had plunged into the rosy tide of pleasure, or floated in soft delirium on its traitorous wave, that reflection dissipated the fairy spell with which she had cheated herself into seeming bliss, and taught her to understand the nature of those feelings which often hung a gloomy shade upon the brilliant gloss of joy, and dimmed with a tear the frolic smile which the triumph of every long-cherished wish illumined in her eye.

Why, when the adulation of a world vras offered up at the shrine of her genius and her charms, did herunsatisfied soul so often turn on itself in anxious search for something dearer to its feelings than the*

ST. DOMINICK.

23

world’s adulation could bestow ? why, even in the moment of pleasurable delirium, did her sated senses sicken in the midst of their gay enjoyment? or why, when gal* lantry wooed her delighted attention with all the persuasive rhetoric of assumed passion, did her ear refuse to convey its homage to her heart, and her lip exhale the sigh of pensive and abstracted reflection ? “ It is,” said Imogen, “ because every u thing dissipates, and nothing touches <e me; because my heart is all a void, a frightful void, and my affections, chilled <f and withered, in vain seek an object to “ kindle their warmth and awaken their energy. And what is praise, unheard “ by one in whose triumph only we can “ truly triumph? and what is pleasure, if the heart participates not in its iilu-“ sions ?”

Often indeed, after the gay and dissipated orgies of the day, had Imogen sought her couch without being pursued thither by one felicitous recollection rescued from

24

THE NOVICE OF

the multitude of enjoyments which had pressed their treasures on her acceptance ; and it was then that the faded vision of her soul-felt bliss floated over awaking memory, and that the now-passive heart stole from the recollection of its former felicity one sweet emotion to warm its latent nerves: for the rich, the noble, the far-famed, lady de St. Dorval remembered on her purple couch of down the golden dream that once hovered over the humble pillow of the Novice of St. Dominick ; that dream which was but the reflected vision of her waking joys; that dream which gave back to her imagination the intercourse of soul she had recently supported with the Minstrel of Provence. Her heart kindled at the endearing remembrance, but despondency chilled the transient glow, and many a tear stained that cheek which the ensuing-day beheld dimpled with the sportive smile of pleasure : for, denied that supreme happiness of which her soul was capable, she pursued the attainment of all those lesser

ST. DOMINICK.

25

joys fortune had placed within her grasp, and pursued them with all that unmodified ardor which marked the enthusiasm of her character, and the vivacity of her disposition.

The last day of her first five weeks’ residence at Paris was that on which Imogen had completed her twentieth year, and, according to her father’s will, was of age. On this day a splendid entertainment was to be held at the hotel de St. Dorval ; and a short time previous to the assembling of her guests, the chevalier requested and obtained a private audience of Imogen in her cabinet. Presenting her a paper he said with a smile—“ It is an old fashioned act “ of civility to present a birth-day gift ; “ and yet it is among the number of those cc little antiquated interchanges of social <s courtesy which time seems willing to u rescue frpm the revolutions of fashion.” And this, I suppose, my dear friend/' said Imogen, looking at the paper, is a ft letter patent of immortality, drawn out

THE NOVICE OF

“ by your long* silent muse in favour of “ your humble servant, and in the form “ of a birth-day ode.’*

" No/* said the chevalier, smiling ; “ it “ is a more humble conveyancer of poor “ temporal dignity.”

Imogen looked again at the paper—the royal seal was attached to it—Imogen changed colour.

The chevalier in a graver tone continued —“ That ancient and illustrious title which ei a series of ages have witnessed in posses-t( sion of your ancestors, but which by the “ influence of the Salique law became ex-tinct with your father’s life,* the king has been graciously pleased to grant to his ff daughter. This paper contains the let-“ ters patent of yôur nobility : that which by inheritance you could not possess, by C( the king’s royal grant is yours. Long “ may the countess de St. Dorval wear the “ coronet of her ancestors, and shed new cc lustre on her distinguished rank—from the light of her more distinguished vir-“ tues.”

ST. DOMINICK.

27

The important paper still trembled unopened in thehand of the youthful countess —the deepest tint of crimson burnt on her cheek—bright was the beam of her flash-ing eye—nor was its brightness dimmed by the tear of grateful emotion through which it sparkled.

“ Your silence/' continued the chevalier, “is eloquent; but to the grateful u feelings which now swell your breast I <c have no other claim than that which a “ wish to serve you confers; the power u (enviable power !) was reserved for ano-u ther, whose ability, though not his will, far surpasses mine. I have only in-u terested those in your favour whose in-“ terest is more powerful in every respect “ than my own, and acted but a subordi-“ nate part to a successful though a con-“ cealed agent.”

“A concealed agent !” repeated Imogen. “On this subject,” said De Sorville, <c you must suffer me to be silent. Suffice cc it to say, that those whom you least sus-

28	THE	NOVICE	OF

“ pect are most anxious for your happi-“ ness and honour ; and that the king met “ the wishes of your friends more than half way, and this morning, in the midst i( of a large circle at the apartments of “ the duchess de Beaufort, made public e( the honours he had conferred on you.

Prepare yourself, therèfore, this even-“ ing, for the felicitations of an adulatory “ crowd ; but in the midst of its interested homage recollect that one glance of ap-?£ probation which virtue elicits, one look “ of applause which merit attracts, is worth ic all that servility ever paid to rank, or in-Ci terest ever offered at the shrine of power.’*

ST. DOMINICK.

29

CHAP. XXXI.

Innumerabile Son l’incantissima Son l’arte magica

Del Dio d’amor.”

Guarinj.

Assumes a various feature to attract,

With charms responsive to each gazer’s eye, The hearts of men.

THE court was never more brilliant, never more crowded, than on the festival of St. Denis, the patron saint of Paris, the day on which the countess de St. Dorval, supported by the duchess de Guise and the marchioness de Belleisle, went to kiss the king’s hands on her elevation to the dignity and title of her ancestors. Although still in the habit of filial grief, on this occasion she cast her “ nighted colour off the brilliant diadem of peerage for the first time encircled her polished brow, and glittered

30

THE NOVICE OF

amidst the luxuriance of her shiningtresses; the purple folds of her velvet robe were con fined to the symmetry of her arms, waist, and bosom, with diamond clasps of immense value; and her zone (which, like the mysterious cestus of Venus, seemed endowed with the power of conferring on its wearer a grace even more than human) was composed of the mo^t precious gems : never had she before appeared so splendid in her attire, so beautiful in her person, so animated in her air, or so bewitching in her manner.

De Sancy made her the subject of an impromptu epigram ; D’Aubigne said she recalled to his mind the queen Margaret de Valois in her nuptial robes; and the old baron de Roquelaure swore by his patron saint that nothing more captivating had appeared at court since the days of the beautiful Mary Gaudoin, who in the reign of Francis the First had conquered by her charms the sacred infallibility of the pope himself*. The king received her grace-

Pope Leo X.

ST. DOMINICK.

31

fui acknowledgments in a manner so gal-lantand fla( tering, that it al mos11ransferred the homage he received to the object from whom it flowed ; and, as he condescendingly fastened a bracelet that fell from the arm of the blooming countess, he impressed the tribute of a kiss on her hand as he relinquished it. The fair Gabrielle turned pale ; the ladies immediately within the circle exchanged, looks of equivocal expression ; and the courtiers, flocking in crowds round the Cynthia of the moment,” traced preferment in every soft propitiatory smile, and beheld in the intelligent beauty of her countenance an index to a volume of honours.

Meantime the youthful peeress, delighted and delighting, conversed alternately with her gracious sovereign, or received the felicitations of the crowd who surrounded him, with dignified and graceful ease, the glow of modest confusion and triumphant pride blushing on her cheek, her eyes beaming with the brilliant emanation of

32

THE NOVICE OF

an elated soul, created to command, and proudly fulfilling its destiny; while her wandering glance sought every where for homage, and every where received it.

But what—what to thee, O child of sentiment! child of passion! over whose sensible and glowing heart nature still preserved her sweet and boundless influence even in the empire of art—what to thee was the adulations of worlds or the homage of kings, compared to that look which met thy unfixed eye, arrested its varying glance, thrilled over thy heart’s vital nerve, and awakened in thy soul a feeling more poignant, more extatic, more powerful, than all ambition, vanity, or pride, ever inspired in their warmest paroxysm of fruition ? The triumph of the Novice of St. Dominick was now, and now only, complete, for the Minstrel of Province was its witness ! The too-fre-quently illusive senses did not now impose this always-welcome cheat ; it was now no vision of enamoured fancy that roused

ST. DOMINICK.

S3

every pulse to rapture’s wildest throb ; it was the frieud of her soul, the object of her heart’s first love, the hero of her imagination, who now, after an absence of near two wearisome and lagging years, presented himself before her. But oh! how changed from the blooming bard of Montmorell—the gallant victor of Laon!

Imogen first beheld him leaning against a pillar ; his arms folded, his glance fixed, on her, the rose of health withered on his cheek, the fire of youth extinguished in his eye : but when in the communion of a look their souls held momentary intercourse, a lambent flame floated on his gaze, and his cheeks seemed to catch the truant crimson that fled from hers. At that moment the king approached him, and twining his arm in that of his favourite’s, they passed on through the door that led to his majesty’s private apartments. Many were the eyes that pursued the object of this enviable distinction ; but Imogen, pale, trembling, and breathless, turned her’s another

VOL. IV.

c

34

THE NOVICE OF

way ; a secret joy thrilled through her whole frame, and poured its crimson tide over the snow amazement the most powerful had shed on her cheek and bosom, which now again flushed with the tints of love’s proper hue.” To conceal the perturbation of her feelings, which every feature betrayed, Imogen turned her glance from that point to which tile gaze of the multitude was directed; and encountered the all-observing, ali-searching look of the chevalier de Sorviile. The warm flow of blissful emotion chilled in every vein, a convulsive start shook lier frame, a deadly faintness diffused its languor over every nerve, and she clung to the arm of the marchioness de Belleisle for support; who, observing her emotion, inquired into its cause, and furnished Imogen with an excuse by supposing the heal of the court had overcome her; then, leading her to an open window, she presented lier.some reviving drops. Imogen, recovered by the air, endeavoured to collect

ST. DOMINICK.

35

some presence of mind ; and, still more recovered by observing the chevalier de Sorville had just left the audience chamber, attempted to answer the inquiries which poured in on every side, not only with ease but gaiety.

" Mere mortality,” said she to de Sancy, who stood next her, " could support it no " longer ;—one should at least have the for-" titude of a primitive saint to sustain the <f intoxicating flattery of you courtiers, or " the constitution of a salamander to exist “ in your atmosphere. Is not the heat in-" supportable, my lord?”

“I am glad you find it so,” said de Sancy, laughing ; for it is but just your " crime should become your retribution ; " and that you, who have kindled a glow "in so many hearts to-day, should share " in the sufferings you have created.”

As the court was now beginning to thin, Imogen presented her hand to de Sancy, who led her to her carriage ; and, as they crossed the great hall of the palace, Imogen again beheld the object of her still-

THE NOVICE OF

agitated thoughts; he was leaning on the arm of the chevalier de Sorville, and slowly ascending the steps of Charles the Ninth’s gallery, which joined the Thuilleries to the Louvre. Imogen’s hand trembled in that of de Sancy’s, who, fixing his eyes on her face, demanded, “ Do you know the duke “ de Beauvilliers ?”

“No,” faintly replied Imogen, while her head, her heart, her imagination, were full of the baron de Montargis.

“ No !” repeated de Sancy, with a smile of seeming incredulity: “ but indeed he is “ better known as the gallant baron de “ Montargis, whose venturous and roman-tic spirit has made him the idol of the “ women, and the favourite of the king, “ who has himself much of thepreM.v c/ie-“ pi aller in his amiable character. De “ Beauvilliers is certainly the mostenviable <f of all human beings. You perceive by “ his habiliments he has just obtained “ his emancipation from the matrimonial “shackle.” Imogen started; the colour

ST. DOMINICK.

37

came to and fled from her cheek in a moment. Luckily her carriage was not yet drawn up, for she had scarcely power to move. And to add to his good fortune/' continued de Sancy, ^ he got rid of a peer-(i ish old father and a silly young wife in “ the same week ; the one died in a fit of ft political spleen, the ether in giving birth to an heir to the illustrious honours of “ the family de Montargis : and the young f< duke, after having indulged his filial and <f conjugal sorrows for the period of three “ months amidst the cypress shades ;of <€ Mcntargis, is now come to Paris to rc-ct cruit his spirits, to regain his place in the “ king's favour, and to afford a boundless (C source of speculation to the disinterested “ beauties of the court, to whom, in the gallery of rank and fashion, a young, rich, handsome, and accomplished, duke tf will appear a star of the first magnitude fc and splendor/'

The state carriage of the lady de St. Dorval having now drawn up, the marquis

38

THE NOVICE OF

placed her in it, demanding if she meant

to grace the arsenal with her presence the following day, as the king himself-was to be there, and to run at the ring. Imogen only bowed her head—she had not the power to articulate a word, and the carriage drove off.

Love in a heart which receives its every motion from the sphere of affectionate feeling, to which the existence of lively and powerful sentiments is an indispensable necessity,—love in such a heart is not to be vanquished even by the influence of reason. Variety may distract, time may* ameliorate, or absence weaken ; but if the passion be not succeeded by another of equal force, if it*change not its nature, its vital spark will till exist, even though the effervescence of its primitive glow may be partially extinguished ; and the object of its inspiration will still retain the power to re-animate its latent principles, and to dissolve the frost which the chilling hand of time or disappointment had shed over

ST. DOMINICK.

39

it. Imogen had endeavoured to cease to love, where still to love was weak, if not criminal; and coincident circumstances had assisted her in the effort, though they had not enabled her wholly to accomplish the self-imposed task. She had even endeavoured to transfuse the glow one object had illumined in her heart to those mild and moderate sentiments another had inspired. But the a (lections, arbitrary in their nature, flow not to the impulses of reason, but lavish their treasures independent of the will of their possessors. The utmost success, therefore, of her endeavour had been to lull the dear bed dangerous recollection of one being into doubtful forgetfulness, and to feel for the other an habitual tenderness, a lively gratitude, a profound and almost reverential esteem. With the one she would have tasted bliss in all its most profound, supremacy; but, from the very nature of her refined and exquisite feelings, it would have been as variable as it was acute, as fragile as it

r

40

THE NOVICE OF

was ardent : for, even amidst the sweetest roses of enjoyment the trembling hand of timid doubt would have flung its thorns., and jealous apprehension, like a wily serpent, would have cankered the bosom of every budding pleasure, and preyed on the sweets of every new-born joy. In her connection will] the other she would at least have been rationally happy; /or the fanciful chimera of a too-fond and all-desiring, all-doubting, heart would not have disturbed the sober placidity of her uniform but contented destiny. Such was the comparative estimate her good sense had formed between what she might have been and what she should be.

To the latter she had been long resigned, when to a sense of the former she was again awakened by the unexpected appearance of the duke de Beauvilliers, even more interesting, though less dazzling in his appearance, and more free, more the master of himself and of his actions, than when, amidst the sequestered shades of

ST. DOMINICK.

41

Montmorell, he had first stolen the virgin rose of her young affections. But though free, was he yet faithful? and though faithful, could she ever be his ? was a question which Imogen’s heart timidly suggested, but to which her reason sternly replied, Never !”

That the name of the duke de Beauvil-liers had scarcely ever been mentioned in her presence had often surprised her ; although, from certain hints and inuendoes dropt by her numerous friends, she had reason to believe her adventure at the camp of Laon had obtained a pretty general circulation ; and that even de Sancy was well informed of the countess de St. Dorval’s being no other than the captive of the baron de Montargis, whom he had accused of violating the laws of war by monopolizing its richest spoil to himself. But that the chevalier had not mentioned to her the death of the young duchess de Beauvil-liers, she supposed arose from his being equally ignorant of the circumstance as c 2

THE KOVICE OF

herself, and the duke having lately lived in such privacy and such retirement from the world.

Imogen had but just reached her home, and was reclined on a couch, indulging' those tears which flowed from a source whose existence she dared scarcely confess to herself, when mademoiselle d’Entragues rushed into the room, and, flinging her arms round I me-gen, exclaimed, “ Then it “ is but loo true! something has ruffled “ those charming spirits which render you

the soul of society. Alas ! that tears “ should drop from those eyes where the “'glance of triumph lately shone! Do “ you know your sudden indisposition at tf the Louvre is the theme of universal “ discussion ? I am j ust returned from the €i hotel de Montmorency ; the whole court cc was assembled there, and nothing talked c< of but your illness : some said indeed “ that you fainted at the king’s leaving “ you for mademoiselle de Guise, upon ct which that severe wretch, Daubigné,

ST. DOMINICK.

43

<s wrote an epigram, which he says he will xt insert in his life of the baron cle Feon-este ; then others said that whatever was “ the cause, de Sancy was no sufferer by the elfects, for you were seen tête-à-“ tête with him in one of the recesses in tf the great hall, after he led you from the “ audiencc-chamber ; upon which some ff one remarked—

“ I must beg,” said Imogen, with dignity, and without the least trace of her former emotion, |f that you will not trouble ff yourself to recollect any more of those “ unfoundedand impertinent observations, 4< beneath you to repeat, or me to attend to. It is true I am but a novice in the 44 world ; but lam very well aware of that “ idle spirit of detraction that governs the 44 aggregate of society, which is oftener ee the offspring of unoccupied ignorance ‘f and simple inanity than premeditated “ malice. The mind filled with the inte-44 rest of its own reflections, the heart oc-44 cupied by the pungency of its own feel-

THE NOVICE OF

“ ings, has no leisure for vague and found-cC less observation on the conduct of fr others, and no inclination to convert tf another’s actions into malignant misin-“ terpretation.”

“ It is all very true,” said mademoiselle d’Entragues ; c‘ and you are the best proof cc of your own assertion ; for your feelings and your reflections have apparently in-volved you this morning beyond the “ possibility of their concealment.”

Mademoiselle de Beuil now entered, accompanied by mademoiselle de Guise, both to enquire after the indisposition of Imogen; who, stimulated to exertion by the last pointed observation of mademoiselle d’Entragues, answered to their enquiries that she was just well enough to receive about a hundred and twenty people whom she expected at her concert that evening, and in which she should take a principal part herself. “ I shall expect you all,” she added ; “ and pray lead a “ crowd in your train, that I may satisfy

ST. DOMINICK.

45

ff the longing anxiety of the dear world et who has interested itself so much in my “ concerns.”

Here a laquais entered with a note, which mademoiselle de Beuil playfully snatched out of Imogen’s hand, a d exclaimed, glancing her eye over it, What ! a billet-doux from the philosophic cheva-lier, and you within a few weeks of be-c< coming his wife! Oh monstrous !”— She then read aloud the following lines: This is one of your public evenings ; “ will you allow the duke de Beauvilliers “ the honour to be numbered among your “ guests, and to accompany to the hotel if St. Dorval	Your

ïC De Sorville?”

(S Very laconic indeed !—no solicitation “ —in the true stile of a Spartan husband.

’Come, my dear little countess, what an-ic swer shall we send ?” continued mademoiselle de Beuil, running to an open escritoire.

“ Whatever you please/* said Imogen,

THE NOTICE OF

with a faint smile, and endeavouring to repress her emotion.

In a minute mademoiselle de Beuil penned and read aloud the following reply : .“The countess de St. Dorval will be ** happy to have the honour of number-ec ing among her guests the duke de Beau-“ villiers.”

64 Here,” she continued, putting the billet into the laquais’ hand, that is synipa-cc thetically brief. And now, my dear “ countess, is not this same chevalier of <f yours a very daring man, to introduce to “ your notice the richest, noblest, hand-tc somest, man in France ?”

In this instance,” said Imogen, “ I ff cannot praise his intrepidity.”

But you cannot be insensible to your “ own,” said mademoiselle d’Entrogues ; “ for this young and interesting duke is a dangerous acquaintance to a woman of “ your character, who is already the pro-“ mised bride of another, for he too pos: “ sesses feeling and sentiment.”

ST. DOMINICK.

47

cf And married a woman/’ said mademoiselle de BeuiJ, “ who possessed nei-ff (her. I suppose von know her story— “■ some say it was a forced union, others

ff that it was a long and mutual attaches

fC ment. Be that as it may, the poor wretch looks as if he had undergone all the horrors of martyrdom, and now comes <f among us to require the reward of his tc sufferings; for my own part I will ho-“ nestly confesss, I should have no objec-tion to dispense it myself.”

The princess de Guise and mademoiselle d’Entragucs laughed at her candour ; and the three young ladies having promised to be among the first who filled the rooms of Imogen, took their leave.

Imogen underwent the form of sitting down to dinner with madame de Rosemont, but arose from the table without having-touched a morsel; convinced of the danger of thought, she loitered with her placid guest until the lateness of the eveningob-liged her to retire to her dressing-room :

4S	THE NOVICE OF

and when the apartments were illuminated, and thrown open for the reception of the company, she descended from her toilette in a dress less splendid indeed than that of which she had divested herself, but infinitely more in point with the character of her countenance and person. The aerial lightness o 1er snowy drapery, the verdant laurel that entwined her brow, the rich luxuriance of her folded très es, the ardent expression of her wandering eyes, the fire of her countenance, and the wild throb of her heaving bosom, all touched her form with something more than human ; and painting might have taken her as a model for a muse in the moment of divine inspiration.

Already the musicians had assembled— Imogen, on an elevated seat, was placed in the midst of them at her harp.

The concert opened with a full overture, and general attention awakened from the influence of individual concern: at that moment the chevalier de Sorvilleand

ST. DOMINICK.

49

the duke de Beauvilliers entered the music-room, and took their station at an illuminated pillar exactly opposite to their illustrious hostess. Presently the sound of the full band died away, the soft and mellow tones of the harp of Imogen only thrilled upon the attention; her fingers’ feathery touch at first awakened but a faint vibration from the chords—her cheek was covered with blushes—her eyes cast to the earth—and modesty obtained a momentary empire over genius ; but the light of heaven was not to be obscured— it re-illumined at the flame of love, and the eye-beam which sunk to the soul of the musician roused all its greater powers of harmony: touched, wrapt, inspired, while the influence of her and various exquisite emotion heightened the rapture of musical enthusiasm, she struck into a full and beautiful symphony, which, gradually gliding into an accompaniment, followed with all the powers of science the melodious tones of her sweet but half-repress-

THE NOVICE OF

ed voice, in which sentiment predominated over execution, and which excited less wonder than emotion in the delighted auditors; until the air, fading in a languid pause, gave play to the executive powers in a difficult and beautiful cantabile, whose dying close was lost in the.effect which the full band striking up produced, and a bravura passage of wonderful skill and execution concluded the song.

Silence for a moment hung in delighted suspensio ; between the intervals of surprise and admiration—V en the murmur of admiration stole into the loudest exclamations of applause;. Imogen arose, and, bending gracefully over lier harp, received the plauditory homage with a blush of triumph and a look of humility.

But the gratification of vanity, even the vanity of genius, is an evanescent emotion, if the heart endows it not with por- » inanent existence. The splendid triumphs of Imogen's talents had hitherto hung no trophies on lier memory. It was now for

ST. DOMINICK.

51

the first time they were eternized in the records of her heart ; and the glance which registered them there traced them in characters of living and imperishable fire.

When she descended from her musical throne she found herself surrounded by a crowd ; but she no longer received this applause with her usual graceful ease : her heart, though full, was still anxious; her eye, though smiling; was unfixed; but in a few minutes, ils glance was studied. She was obliged to withdraw from the crowd; and had just lake possession of a remote seat7 when the chevalier approached; and led towards her the d;:ke de Ueauvilliers.

“ 1 know,” said he, as he presented his friend, “ 1 know by anticipation what will “ be the result of uniting two persons, who, “ in tracing each other’s perfections, will “ soon lose sight of the few good qualities “ I can lay claim to, bill who cannot feel “ for each other a more perfect esteem and " friendship than I wish them mutually to

THE NOVICE OF

<s inspire—than I am inclined to feel for both. To join in bonds of amity the ff only surviving representatives of the il-e: lustrious houses of De Montargis and “ De St. Dorval, lias long been the anx-c‘ ious wish, and is now the proudest tri-umph, of my heart/'

The duke bowed low, hut was silent ; Imogen dared noteven trust herself to raise, her eyes: the chevalier presented a chair to his friend by Imogen's ; then, taking his station at the back of her’s, he continued : “ How striking, how sweet the contrast this scene presents, to that in which you, cf my lord, last parted with your charming “ captive ! there all was discord and dan-(t ger, here all harmony and pleasure/'

“ And yet," said the duke, “ so inde-“ pendent of situation is happiness, so en-“ tirely does it steal its existence from in-“ ternal consciousness and the bosom’s u home-felt sensation, that it is possible “ the sigh of misery might arise amidst the “ thronging pleasures of this festive scene,

«

ST. DOMINICK.

53

ff and amidst the terrific tumult of a camp ff felicity bestow its most radiant smile.”

“ While we allow,the possibility/' said the chevalier, “ which I am far from deny-“ ing, let us hope that we all rather be-<£ lieve than feel it to be so.”

“For my part,” said de Sancy, who had just joined them, “ I believe we are much “ more apt to seek misery than it is to pur-“ sue us ; there is something in it conso-“ nant, perhaps, to the pride of our na-“ tures; every man who suffers fancies « himself a hero during the period of his €e sufferings, and is sure to command ei-“ ther the pity or admiration of those who “ witness them. I must confess I have “ always found happiness a very thriving “ plant, independent of soil or climate. <e I have gathered its delicious flowers in iC a camp, and plucked them in a court; “ and though I had hitherto lived a sceptic “ to its existence, the form that I now Ci see, and the voice I have lately heard, would convert me from the profoundest

54

THE NOVICE OF

ÉC depth of infidelity into al] the supersti-s( tions of the most boundless credulity.” The marquis bowed low to Imogen ; who,, unable to reply, and gladjo be relieved, consented to join mademoiselle de Guise in a favourite duo of Busy D'Am-boines, who accompanied it himself on the organ. When she had finished, she found the duke and the chevalier still at her side : “ The countess de St. Dorsal is doubtless much improved since you last heard lier sing ?” said (lie chevalier, addressing the duke ; “ for, though you are a silent, 1 per-“ ceive you are notan insensible auditor.” “ Insensible ! ’ repeated the duke, waving his head.

I knew nothing of the science,” said Imogen hastily, when I had the honour " to be known to the duke ; and he is doubtlessly too exquisite a musician to ■r receive any gratification from the per-“ formance of one who has yet scarcely ** escaped from the trammels of tuition.” Pardon me, madam,” said the duke,

ST. DOMINICK.

6B

fi genius like yours, however obscured by “ modesty in your own estimation, cannot ee be so unconnected with judgment as to “ render its possessor insensible to those “ merits in herself, to which in others she “ is so much alive. And oh ! why talk of 'f the trammels of tuition ?—-you, at least, t<r are no imitative musician, but the ftnin-e( dress of a new style of music, in which “ nature and feeling only could have in-“ structed you. Your’s is indeed the mu-iC sic of the heart—it is the language of sentiment, of passion,—and true to all cc its modifications, it breathes all those “ finer emotions of the soul to which words “ can give no being. Perhaps to be a “ iruly-fine musician, it is requisite to have “ loved ; and to raise the art to its acme “ of perfection, the presence of the object “ beloved should animate the exertions of “ its magic powers ; then it respires all “ the tenderness of the enamoured soul, te and awakens even in the coldest bosom rf some faint glow of corresponding emo-tion.”

THE NOVICE OF

£6

The duke as he concluded raised his eyes from Imogen, and fixed them expressively on the chevalier de Sorville ; while Imogen perceived,, in this tribute to her musical talents, an oblique and delicate reference to her situation with respect to her guardian.

“ But this charming science/’ said the chevalier, “ is not the only spoils the coun-tf tess de St. Dorval has carried off from “ the Tuscan muses ; in painting, her exe-“ cution, and in statuary her taste, are by “ no means inferior to her musical powers.”

“ My dear friend,” exclaimed Imogen, <e let not your partiality for the artist bias “ your judgment with respect to her “ works ; do not raise that illusive expec-ff tation in another where a similar parti-“ ality cannot exist to second its effects.”

If All may not possess the chevalier’s judgment to appreciate the works,” said the duke, with a cold bow and a colder smile;/' but few, I believe, will be defi-fe cient in partiality for the artist, though

ST. DOMINICK.

57

fc not at all in an equal degree. The sun, “ though invariable in its nature, produces 5‘ a different influence according to the bo-“ dies on which it acts : some dissolve by es its warmth, and others condense by its ardor ; while all which revolve round it must receive their lumination from its “ beams.

The duke bowed to Imogen ; and shortly after, pleading an engagement at the Louvre, took his leave. At the same moment the chevalier was called on by the marchioness de Belleisle to make one at a party at lansquenet; and the marquis de Sancy and the lord high constable took their station at either side of their fair hostess ; but for the first time she found it impossible to converse with the former, and did not even affect attention to the florid compliments of the latter.

When the heart is all awake, the mind frequently slumbers, and the soul, wrapt in its own cogitations, rejects the acces-

VOL. IV.	d

5S

THE NOVICE OF

sary beam of imagination, and leves to repose from the airy flights of fancy.

Imogen, spiritless, silent, and abstracted, unable to repress her feelings, yet scarcely sensible that she indulged them, believed herself overcome with fatigue ; and, deputing madame de Rosemont to do the honours of her house, seized on a moment when she was unobserved to steal away from the company, and retired to her own apartment. There, flinging herself on a couch, (while the dark red flame of a wood • fire spread round a gloomy light, and formed a striking contrast to the brilliant scene she had left,) overpowered, dissolved, almost ignorant of the nature of those conflicting feelings by which her bosom was agitated, she burst into a passion of tears, .which arose almost to convulsive sobs ; when she suddenly found herself inclosed in the arms of mademoiselle d’Entragues.

“ My beloved friend/’ she exclaimed, “ what means this strong emotion? oh I

ST. DOMINICK.

59

<f why these tears? If the young, the “ rich, the all-admired, all-adored, court-e- tess de St. Dorval knows moments of misery, who shall dare expect happiness <c on earth ?”

“ You mistake,” said Imogen, touched bÿ the compassionating tenderness of her friend’s manner, though shocked at her unseasonable intrusion, ct I am not un-<s happy ; how indeed should I, possessing “ every thing that can constitute happi-<tr ness ? But there are intervals of depres-“ sion, even in the bosom of felicity— tf which—”

tf Oh !” said mademoiselle d’Entragues, ’tis in vain you would conceal it ; 1 have ff long suspected that those vile reports have reached your ear—so false and so “ injurious.”

<f What reports ?” interrupted Imogen ; et do not, I beseech you, keep me in sus* “ pense.”

‘c I would at least wish to put you on “ your guard against those who profess u themselves your friends-—but—”

60

THE NOVICE OF

“ In mercy trifle not with my feelings : “ what reports do you allude to ?”

“ Why, those circulated by the gascon-ading officers of Laon, de Chateauneuf <c and some others; mere camp anecdotes * —nothing more.”

“ At least I intreat I may hear them.” “ Well then, since you will have it so, ce it was reported that you were only the “ adopted daughter of the late count de a St. Dorval, while in fact you stood re-" lated to him in a very different light ; “ that you followed him to the siege of Laon ; were taken prisoner there by the <f then baron de Montargis ; that your “ conqueror became your captive; and (t that you would have very willingly changed sides ; but the chevalier deSor-“ ville interfered, and carried you back to “ his friend, who in gratitude bequeathed you to the philosopher on his death-bed ; “ and a thousand other ridiculous and in-“ congruous stories, which carry in them-“ selves such proof of their falsity; that

ST. DOMINICK.

01

*' to hear and to discredit them is syno-4f nimous. Has not (said I, the other day, to one of those chattering gossips “ who infest the court)—has not the king “ even restored to her the title of her an-“ cestors ? Upon which de Sancy, or de Mimpsel, or d’Aubigné, or some of those “ satirical wretches who delight in the mis-“ fortunes of their best friends, immedi-“ ately replied, Aye, but his majesty has “ always certain letters patent of nobility, (t which pretty women can purchase, from “ a ducal coronet to a simple barony.— “ But, indeed, my dear friend, it was a “ very simple thing of you to leave the c< music-room when the duke de Beauvil-<< liers retired; every eye was upon you f< when he entered ; it was observed too that the chevalier never left your side (t while his soi-disant rival remained near “ you ; whose presence or whose absence, “ said de Servin, your protégée, acted <c with magic force on our witty countess, u for she was as silent as a faquir in the

62

THE NOVICE OF

ci act of penance during the whole even-“ ing,—She did not indeed act with as C4 much presence of mind,, said the old lady de Noirmontier, as on the fainting occa-“ sion at the Louvre.—Aye, like poor Sappho, said d’Aubigne, she thinks the “ less her sense, the more her love ap-“ pears; and the duke, having already u proved his compassionating disposition “ by marrying one love-sick damsel out of

“ mere pity----Upon which I interrupted

“ him and mentioned your engagement 4C with the chevalier.—Aye, said some* body, (I know not who,) but the cheva-st lier is a philosopher. But I distress 44 you by this folly. Heaven knows how 44 sincerely I love and admire you, and 44 how thoroughly I am convinced that 44 your singular merit, your talents, and iC your genius, are the cause of all the ma-<4 lice that envy has set afloat against you.” With these words mademoiselle d’En-tragues affectionately embraced Imogen, and, wishing her a good night, returned lo the company.

ST. DOMINICK.

63

Never could the venom of malicious report have been distilled into the ear of Imogen with a less poisonous effect.— Where two contending emotions struggle in the heart, the pre-eminence of one soon determines the contest. Love and mortification disputed the empire of Imogen's bosom ; but the flight of her memory from the standard of the latter (for the remembrance of agonizing conviction is but tran-~	saicl	"slier clinging to *h‘e insi-

dious flattery of her detailing friend, “ why e< should those inconsequent effects give 64 me pain, where my own superiority is <c the cause? and what is the opinion of “ the world to a soul at peace with itself? cC At peace with itself!” said Imogen, and heaved a deep sigh. Then by a sudden transition of thought the world disappeared, and the Minstrel of Provence alone filled her imagination, her heart. His more-than-ever interesting form, the tones of his voice, his peculiar mode of exprès-

64

THE NOVICE OF

sion, the still glowinganimated enthusiasm of his manner, gave back to her soul all those vivid emotions it was calculated to feel, all that it had so long lain under the prohibition of feeling. Again life appear-, ed to her under a new aspect; again a vague and undefinable sensation of delight thrilled o’er every sense ; but it was like the sunbeam which ushers in the gloom of a gathering cloud, which gleams far. a_iu o m en t i n ^d e w y r a y s^t h e nji,nk s b e -her indissoluble connection, with de Sor~ ville rushed on her recollection. The indifference with which the duke had alluded to that connection, and the world’s suspicions that she was attached to the latter while on the point of giving her hand to the former, raised in her agitated bosom a variety of emotions, each more painful, more distressing, than that by which it was preceded. To disappoint the world, by shewing herself superior to its malicious efforts to destroy her happiness, was the

ST. DOMINICK.

65

immediate suggestion of her pride ; to return the indifference of the duke de Beau-villiers with indifference commensurate to his own was the dictates of her delicacy ; and to continue firm in her resolution of becoming the wife of the object of her father’s election, was the result of her prudence, her reason, and her honour.

With these resolutions she retired to rest. The consciousness of good intentions lured the spirit of repose to her pillow; but while reason slumbered, love still kept his vigils, and, in the dream of her sleep, m^tle the image of the Minstrel the object of’her devotion.

D 2

THE NOVICE OF

CHAP. XXXII.

E quai sorte e ]a mia tie pena in pena Di timoré in timor passo e non piovo Un momento di pace.

Metastasio.

TO annihilate the budding hopes of envious malice ; to crush suspicion in its infancy; to conceal the secret and corroding sorrow of her heart from the eye of public observation ; to support that strength and equanimity of mind requisite to carry her through with the conquest of her warring feelings,—Imogen fled from the influence of reflection, and plunged into that vortex which the world calls pleasure. She had hitherto resigned herself to its power in the utter deficiency of those greater, those profounder enjoyments which her warm soul was created to feel ; now she became the willing slave df its laws to save herself from that bondage whose shackles she felt

ST. DOMINICK.

67

would twist round the heart’s most vital fibres.

From pleasure/’ said she, I can al-“ ways free myself; but, should I suffer a “ sentiment again to pervade my soul, to <f fill my imagination, to fasten on my ft heart”—She paused abruptly;—though her exclamation was but mental, she dared not pursue the idea, for many a sweet and dangerous sensation clung to her as she proceeded in the argument.

Had Imogen listened to the documents of reason, of prudence, they would have told her, You deceive yourself—there is but one step left for you : retire from the scene where you still delight to loiter; retire from the object whom you still delight to behold ; and become the partner of him on whose bosom only thou canst lay thy head in safety, whose mild nature will moderate the ardor of thine, for whom thou art destined, and; by whom thou art beloved/

But what are the documents of reason?

6S

THE NOVICE OF

when opposed to the sophistry of passion in an enamoured heart? Imogen dared not attempt a self-investigation, and continued deceived, because she wished to be so.

The circle at the hotel de St. Dorval continued daily to extend, and the entertainments of its hostess became more numerous and more brilliant ; while her society was equally sought at home, or courted abroad. At the former the duke de Beauvilliers no longer appeared, after his first night’s introduction : but in public he was frequently met by the countess de St. Dorval ; in the brilliant crowd of fashion they were seldom closely asssociated. Yet not always did chance or premeditation preserve this distance between the novice of St. Dominick and the Minstrel of Provence; there were moments of sweet community, when in the interchange of a few words all the eloquence of sentiment betrayed itself, when thought met thought, and the eye became a conductor to the soul’s effusion ; when in a broken sentence, a simple mo-

ST. DOMINICK.

69

nosyllable, or seeming incoherent expression, a volume was unfolded ; when the luminous region of genius, opening around them each for a moment, would sparkle with a beam caught from the scintillation of the other’s fire ; each would anticipate the other’s idea, and explain them to themselves. But transient and unfrequentwas the sacred communion of feeling and of mind :—the world would still rudely rush between ; prudence would hang its icicle on the glowing soul ; and duty, with an iron grasp, check the throbbing pulse of the tender heart :—then the golden vision vanished, and all was cold and hopeless. Imogen believed she should rejoice that the duke made not the faintest attempt to renew his intimacy with her, or to visit at her house ; but she felt that she regretted it. While the chevalier, still maintaining his boundless empire in her esteem, lost with an hourly decrease his influence over her conduct, it was in vain he advised with the solicitude of a friend.

TO

THE NOVICE OF

or the authority of a guardian. Imogen, involved, borne away, alternately the sport of her feelings or her ambition, seeking to conceal the wants of her heart beneath the trophies of her vanity, evinced in her conduct that genius and common mon sense bear no inseparable relation to each other ; and that even the virtues of the heart and the understanding are sometimes but remotely connected : for, while her charities flowed like an abundant and devious stream from the rich source of ex-haustiess benevolence, her justice slumbered ; and the industrious creditor was frequently sent empty handed from her door, because the indigent petitioner had already left it no longer indigent. While her open hand was humanely stretched forth to lead drooping merit from the cell of obscurity, it was of necessity closed on the claimant whose wants should have been satisfied, because her feelings and her taste had got the start of her equity ; and while the name of Imogen de St. Dorvaf

ST. DOMINICK.

71

called a blush of pleasure on the haggard cheek of misery, and awakened a beam of joy in the eye of neglected genius, justice sued in vain for that which generosity lavished with indiscriminate profusion.

Meantime the Parisian court continued its winter campaign of pleasure with unabating spirit, and Imogen continued to frequent the Louvre, and to shine the brightest of its ornaments. The king himself invited her to accompany the court to Fonfcainbleau, whither he was going for a few days to enjoy the pleasures of the chase —the pride of Imogen was flattered by the invitation, but her heart denied its interest; for indisposition prevented the duke de Beauvilliers from attending the royal train, and the chevalier de Sorville refused the offer of an invitation from the duchess de Guise.

Imogen, whose drift had long been to appear ever thing but what she was, to affect gaiety even to dissipation, and to pursue the phantom pleasure beyond the

72

THE NOVICE OF

boundary of all rational moderation, appeared on this occasion with unusual taste and characteristic splendor. Mounted on a white palfrey, the brilliant crescent sparkling- on htr beautiful brow, the sandal betraying the symmetry of her fine-' turned ancle, the quiver suspended from her shoulder, and a bow in her hand, she appeared amidst the splendid train of Dian like the presiding deity of the chase. Here, as in every other instance, the person of Imogen received its greatest charm from the power of her genius and her taste ; and even the beauty of the duchess de Beaufort was eclipsed by the whim and originality of the countess de St. Dorval.

The second day of the stag-hunt all the ladies of the court (who the day before had appeared-dressed according to the unrefined custom of the times on such occasions, en cavalier) adopted the habit à la Diane : the light and modest drapery of this habiliment converted the intrepid vo-tarists of the chase into the attendant

ST. DOMINICK.

78

nymphs of the goddess of chastity,, while many sportive vaudevilles and arch epigrams were the result of this suden transformation. During this period of festive gaiety Imogen rather sustained than enjoyed her part : her senses were bewildered, her vanity gratified, but her heart was untouched ; and the eye which emanated the brighest beams of pleasure during the day, at night drops tears which flowed not

from the source of ecstacy.

----—

returned to Paris, weary of amusement-weary of herself; yet anxious that the celebrity which had attended her in her expedition should have arrived before her. She called immediately for her porter’s book, and ran her eye over the names of those who had called in her absence; there were fewer women and more men than usual, but among the latter that of the duke de Beauvilliers did not appear. The evening of her return was that on which the wits and literati of Paris assembled

THE NOVICE OF

at her house, and on which she had endeavoured to establish a conversazzioni, such as she had mingled in at Florence : but at Paris literary taste was not yet established on her throne; and though this, species of attic entertainment was at first pursued with avidity, from the attraction of its novelty, its elegant foundress soon felt it was impossible to preserve it from those innovations which the want of a

unity in taste and sentiment of its mem-uers cun milieu 10 maite.

All those who had not been invited to Fontainbleau crowded on this evening to the hotel de St Donal to meet those who had. Among the numerous assembly was d’Aubigné, de Servin, de Mempsel, de Nicholas, de Sançy, Colin thè poet, and several others whose talents endowed them with the immunity of an universal welcome.

Amidst this bright pleiades of wit, Imogen herself shone not with an inferior light ; and was sportively flinging round her random beams, when the chevalier de Sorville

ST. DOMINIQK.	75

and the duke de Beauvilliers entered the apartment.

Imogen endeavoured, and with some success, to conceal the pleasure, the surprise, the emotion, which this unexpected visit inspired : she pressed the chevalier’s hand with more than usual warmth, and endeavoured to veil beneath the obvious pleasure with which she received him, the secret delight which throbbed her heart at the presence of his friend. Confused and agitated, m spite of every effort at composure and reserve, she received the compliments of her illustrious guest with an air hurried, though constrained ; and felt relieved when the crowd gathered round him to enquire why he had not been at Fontainbleau. The gaieties of the court there, the pleasures of the chace, with all the fashionable politics of the day, then became the topic of general conversation : all who had been there triumphed in their enjoyments, and all who had not regretted their disappointment.

THE NOVICE OF

76

“ Why were you not among us, de Sor-“ ville ?” said the marquis, addressing the chevalier j “ your loss was irreparable : for ts there was a nameless enchantment in “ the pleasures of Fontainbleau that might “ have warmed the cold heart of misan* “ thropy itself.

“ Or transmigrated the spirit of an Al-“ cibiades into the cynical soul of a Dio-“ genes/' said de Pervin, bowing low, and pointedly to de Sorville.

“ Did you leei mac u produced that ef-<c feet?” retorted the chevalier drily.

Nay,” said de Servin, though I had cc not the happiness to be there, I can give credit to the metamorphosing powers of “ the air of Fontainbleau ; for I am told “ that several of our beauties sent in their “ resignation to the court of Paphos, and “ enlisted in the vestal train of Diana.” And the Journal d’Etoile tells us,” said de Mempsel, “ that each particular “ nymph had her Endymion.”

“ While the presiding deity herself/' said

ST. DOMINICK,

77

de Saucy, bowing to Imogen. “ treated the “ many who panted to become her Endy-a mions with the rigorous fate of Acteon.” “ And like Acteon,” said d’Aubigné, laughing, “ they have been torn to pieces “ by dogs; for the satirical editors of the " Journal d’Etoile have been most barba-ce rously severe on you all.

ff If the rigorous strictures of our satir-V ists were to be made the standard of the “ morality of the age,3' said the chevalier, " the present would be esteemed the most “ virtuous in the annals of time; but, as more of the gall of individual rancour, « or the ostentation of wit, is displayed in their bitter ephemera of the hour, than “ sound reproof or pointed admonition, “ they do but sharpen the point of private (i animosity, without effecting any public (J benefit.”

“ My dear chevalier/’ said de Servin, “ you are like a child who vents his rage on the rod which has inflicted his wound ; “ for I should almost be tempted to be»

78

THE NOVICE OF

“ lieve that these haughty satyrists had u handled you a little roughly/’

rf No/’ said the chevalier coolly, " I ‘6 have neither rank, talents, nor virtues, to “ render the exposition of my failings an object of temptation to them ; had I pos-C( sessed them, my soreness on that point would not now be a matter of doubt to “ you, monsieur de Servin.”

“ De Servin/’ said Imogen, gaily, and eager to interrupt the keen retort which shone in the eye of her protégé, “ have ie you nothing pleasant for me this even-ee ing? do not let me forget myself into “ mortality ;—I thought my expedition to* “ Fontainbleau would have roused all “ the witchcraft of your lyre I”

rf Alas !” said de Servin, “ my lyre, like “ that of Anacreon, was repulsive to its “ master’s touch ; and, when I would have “ sung your triumphs, returned only de* u gies of woe for your loss.”

*e Then pray let us have your elegiac strains—come, we will adjourn to the

ST. DOMINICK.

79

“ music-room, and if there are any who “ wish to witness my apotheosis*’—she paused abruptly, and cast a glance.,of smiling, though blushing, invitation on the duke de Beauvilliers. A glance only was the reply ; a deeeper blush, a sweeter smile, confessed the eloquence of the silent communion. She extended her hand, de Sancy seized it, and led her to the music-room ; the few who surrounded her followed ; the duke and the chevalier were of the number, the rest were engaged with primero and scandal. De Servin was an excellent improvisatore ; he took up a Jute, and, after striking a few chords, sung an address to his charming hostess, in which the strongest flattery was chastened by the most delicate taste. The theme was sufficient to elicit the most boundless plaudits to the song ; and the poet and his subject were equally complimented by the auditors ; inspiration seemed awakened ; de Sancy took the, offered lute from de Servin, and sang an extempore replication

SO

THE NOVICE OF

to his strains, then presented it to the duke de Beauvilliers. “ I do not touch the lute/' said he, returning it.

“ But the harp,”, murmured Imogen.

“ The harp,” repeated de Beauvilliers, fixing his eyes on her face. In a moment' the instrument was drawn towards him; the duke for a moment paused, Imogen’s eyes were cast on the earth, de Beauvil-liers* on her. The silence of expectation flung around its stilly spell: from the harp of the Minstrel arose the strain of passion, from his lips ascended the song of the soul ; it was the song whose witching mur murs first awakened the slumbering spirit of harmony in the bosom of the Novice of St. Dominick, when love stole its existence from the union of sentiment and sound, the latter thrilling on her senses, but the former reaching her heart. Now awakened the associating principle of feeling and thought in the breast of the lady de St. Dorval ; memory rushed like lightning through each sweet interval of bliss ;

ST. DOMINICK.

81

the present faded on the mind, fancy presented only the joys of the past; and Imogen of Montmorell again hung entranced upon those strains of which she had been the inspiration and the theme. The duke ceased : the room rung with applause, the countess de St. Dorval alone was silent; the duke was overwhelmed, but not by the repeated bursts of approbation^ for he heard them not.

After a long, an eloquent pause, Imogen raised eyes^ and found that of the groupe which surrounded her the duke only remained; the rest were taking refreshments from the hands of the pages, who had just entered laden with the choicest and most luxurious delicacies.

“ You have lost nothing of that charm-*' ing art in which you formerly excelled,” said Imogen in a tremulous voice.

“ Formerly excelled,” repeated the duke emphatically; “ do you then deign to re-f< call that formerly to your mind?”

VOL. it.	x

S2	THE NOVICE OF

“ That is,” said Imogen in a voice still Jess articulate, “ since 1 first heard you : €< since”—she paused abruptly.

“ I remember the time well,” said the duke. “ It was in the tapestry room of “ the chateau de Montmorell. I was sum-“ moned to the presence of the lady Mag-“ delaine: yes, she is now before me; the formality of her air, the rigid severity ff of her looks, relaxing into a smile of en-couragement. She was surrounded by ff her women ; the simple cast of their countenances, the grotesque fashion of “ their habits: while you! you were seat-ed apart when I entered, your head. “ drooping over a frame. It was placed near an open casement, through which " the sun cast its last red beam as it sank behind the forest of Champagne. I thought you blushed when your eye met “ mine, but perhaps it was only the sun’s " beamy glow which flushed your cheek “ beyond its own rich tint, for your veil “ had fallen on your shoulders, and the

ST. DOMINICK.

83

beams of heaven played like a glory “ round your head.55

“ And then,” continued Imogen, while her heart beat, and every pulse throbbed with delicious violence, <c and then the lady Magdelaine made you one of her ff classic speeches, and commanded an ex* “ ertion of your charming art; you bowed and obeyed, while I—” ff And wdiile I,” added the duke expressively.

Imogen blushed deeply ; the duke sign* ecT and continued: " At the conclusion of my song we parted ; but again we “ met. The moon had just risen above the vale of Nogent; its paly light trembled on the waves of the Aisne : a nightin-f<r gale had taken its station beneath the " branches of a linden-tree which shaded “ the terrace of the castle whither 1 had directed my steps to inhale the evening “ breeze. I beheld you leaning over a palisade; the melting murmur of your voice flowed with the pensive strain of

THE NOVICE OF

“ night’s sweet bird, your tears dropped <( with its falling dew, and your sigh stole “ on the stilly interval of its unfrequent “ gales. Then I dared to approach, “ and—**

The profound, the tender, the impassioned, emotion of Imogen arose with every word; her colour varied, her heart throbbed : not knowing what she did, she half arose from her chair, then again sat down. At that moment a page approached, and presented refreshments. Imogen still bewildered, still confused, poured out a glass of wine, and presented it to the duke. Without taking it from her hand, he grasped it in his : the glass shook, for the hands which held it had communicated a reciprocal tremor to each other. The last draught which Imogen had presented to the baron de Montargis was in the camp of Laon : the recollection of that circumstance rushed with mutual influence to their minds ; till* obedient to the immutable law of sympathy, the power of at-

TÇHE KO VICE OF

ed seated in the attitude in which the duke had left her $ her air involved, abstracted, her eyes swimming in languor, her bosom throbbing, and an unconscious smile playing round her lips. At that moment the marquis de Sancy approached : he had watched her at a distance during the whole of her conversation with the duke ; he now took his station at the back of her chair.

“ It is,” said he pointedly, “ in the ab-“ sence of the sun, that planets of inferior order dare to betray their feeble beams.” “ What is your allusion ?” demanded Imogen with a blush and a smile.

“ Were you to ask what was my ilia-“ sion, I could answer you,” said the marquis ; but for my allusion—”

You are problematic,” returned Imogen.

“ And yet that blush seems to under-“ stand me,” replied he. “ The duke de “ Beauvilliers—”

“ What of him ?” asked Imogen, again changing colour.

ST. DOMINICK.

87

“ That he is gone saturated with bliss, “ and I now venture to approach and pick “ up the crumbs which fall from the rich “ man's table.”

“ And was his absence requisite for you “ to approach ?”

(e Certainly; for I have not the self-de-" niai of the philosophic chevalier, who, “ like the saints of old, seems to expose “ himself to trials merely to shew his for-“ titude in supporting them.”

Imogen had so long been accustomed to hear the name and character of her amiable guardian the sport of satyrical wit or playful raillery, that what at first irritated and disgusted her, now from habit was heard without emotion. While she perfectly understood the pointed allusion of de Sancy, she endeavoured to give a new turn to the conversation by asking if he had engaged at primero during the evening.

(c No,” said he; but if you have a “ mind to throw the gauntlet I will pick it

* 11







ST. DOMINICK.

89

her awakened heart, she played with so little attention with so little skill, and in the exhilaration of her spirits staked so high, that in a short time she lost all the ready money she was mistress of, and found herself the marquis's debtor for a sum treble what she had ever before contracted to any one. The marquis insisted on considering the debt as cancelled, except she gave him an opportunity of allowing her a chance of winning back some of her own money. Imogen, by the instances of ,de Servin, who leaned at the back of her chair, was prevailed on. The game was begun with fresh spirit ; fortune at first seemed to smile on Imogen, but before it was finished she had doubled her debt.

No one in general lost with more temper or more grace than Imogen, It was now for the first time her ease forsook her: she arose from the table in great perturbation ; nor was it lessened by observing that the chevalier de Sorville had returned to the room, and was standing near her, though unper-e 2

THE NOVICE OF

ceived, daring the latter part of the game. When Imogen mentioned the sum she had lost, and begged to be considered the debtor of the marquis de Sancy till the following day, she stole a glance at De Sorville and observed his colour change as he walked away. De Sancy begged she would not limit his enviable privilege to a day ; for that as long as she would do him the honour to consider him her creditor, he should sensibly feel himself her debtor. He then endeavoured to draw her into conversation, which Imogen endeavoured to support— but it was but an endeavour: and the company shortly after dispersing, the marquis took his leave, and Imogen retired to her own apartment.

The train of reflection she was so anxious to indulge in was frustrated by the presence of Beatrice, who, with a countenance full of intelligence, assured her she had the most extraordinary and wonderful circumstance in the world to relate, if she would allow her the honour of a moment’s hearing.

ST. DOMINICK»

91

Imogen, though never less inclined to indulge the loquacit}7 of her attendant, with her usual good nature gave her assent, and Beatrice began :

“ Why, my lady, it is the most marvel-“ lous of all possible stories—thus it runs : “ You must know, lady, that the chief tire-woman of my lady duchess de Guise ff gave a party this evening, at which I 4C had the honour to be invited. Well, “ there were none but laquais and ser-“ vantes of the first fashion there, especi-ally monsieur François, own gentleman “ to my lord marquis de Sancy, than whom “ I know not a more discreet or pleasant “ youth. It was he who proposed we “ should all go to the Louvre to see the Swiss guards reviewed by the king and “ the master of the ordnance ; and scarcely <f had we reached the terrace of the capu-“ chins than a young officer approached “ to speak to the musquetaire who stood sentinel at the great gate. We all made “ way for him to pass, when, just looking

THE NOVICE OF

<f under the plumes of his helmet, Christ !

I thought I should have fainted; upon cc which monsieur François was so obliging as to offer me his blue glass smelling “ bottle—”

ff But the young officer, Beatrice ?” Why, lady, the young officer—holy C( Mother! how I screamed!—the young officer was little Theodore the page ; but <f so thin, and so tall, and so handsome !” Theodore! and did he recognize you ?*’ <c Instantly, lady ; dear sweet soul ! for “ all his gold, embroidery, and high “ plumes, he knew me in a moment, and cr gave me a courteous salute on the left “ cheek before every one; upon which it must be owned monsieur Francois look-“ ed rather grave.” .

But Theodore, Beatrice ?”

Well, good my lady, we both leaned <f over the palisado, while the demoiselles, “ my companions, appeared vastly proud to see such a noble-looking cavalier in tc their company ; and in the twinkling of

ST. DOMINICK.

93

6e a needle I told him your whole story, tc and how happy I was to meet you in cf dear Provence, for which I have never <c ceased to thank my patron saint. Bless-“ ed Virgin! how red and how pale he “ grew ! and how the tears rushed to his eyes, and how sweetly he smiled ! Then " in a few words he told me his adven-<f tures ; how he enlisted in his majesty’s <f service ; and how, in the course of time, he got into the regiment of the duke de i( Beauvilliers. And now comes far the fc most wonderful of all : I'll give my lady te a dozen guesses to find out who this cf same duke is—why, then, no other but ‘c the minstrel youth of Montmorell !— “ Bless me, lady, are you not amazed ?” f‘ No,” said Imogen, endeavouring to command her rising emotion, for I am “ already acquainted with the circum-stance, and must request you will not “ mention it in my family or elsewhere $ u as the duke may not wish to have his ad-*( venture publicly known, though then

94	THE	NOVICE OF

“ sanctioned by the unhappy situation of ct the times; and should you ever breath “ it, you must no longer hope for my (t friendship or countenance.”

<f I, my lady!” returned Beatrice eagerly ; “ I take the saints to witness I “ would not tell it to my mother (God rest “ her precious soul !) were she alive, when you desired me not; no, not to monsieur “ François himself; although he was not c‘ a little curious about the fine young offi-tc cer who accompanied me home here to “ the house ; for I bade monsieur Fran-“ çois good evening in the great court of <c the Thuilleries, as Theodore said he iC wished to speak to me alone ; and then cc to be sure it was all about my lady coun-“ tess. He told me, also the duke had ie behaved like an angel, as soon as he re-collected him, which he did one morn-ing on parade in the public court ; and shortly after presented him a commis-“ sion ; that he had been stationed in one “ of the distant provinces with his regi-

ST. DOMINICK.

95

<e ment; and that he had only come to <c Paris last night with despatches,, and <r should return to his regiment in a few et days.”

“ But I hope I shall see him before his te departure ?” said Imogen.

He begged 1 would solicit my lady for “ permission to wait on her to-morrow,” returned Beatrice,fc when he meant to call “ at the hotel St. Dorval.”

Amidst the extreme pleasure Imogen felt in the hope of again beholding, and perhaps of serving, a person to whose early and friendly exertions she was indebted for all her subsequent good fortune ; with whom she had once been so closely associated, and whose amiable character she so much admired, a new source of unhappiness arose. In withholding from de Sorville the knowledge of her acquaintance with the duke de Beauvilliers under the character of the Minstrel, she had hitherto sheltered herself in the vow of secrecy enacted from her by the latter

THE NOVICE OF

a thousand times. The candour of her nature, the open ingenuousness of her character, had impelled the confession to her lips in those unguarded moments when the tenderness and the virtues of de Soryille had called on the boundless confidence of her heart; yet the delicate reserve of lingering love, and a sense of the promise that had been claimed of her, had always frustrated the intention ; but now that the possibility existed of that circumstance reaching his ear by other means, she felt almost to remorse the error she had been guilty of. She was now in the power of her servant, who might reveal through simplicity what from principle she could not be tempted to betray ; and in that of a young man, who was ignorant of the necessity of preserving that secret which it was now of such material consequence to her should not be revealed.

Still lost in wild perplexity of thought, still the victim of her warring feelings, Imogen suffered her servant to proceed

ST. DOMINICK.

97

without hearing a sentence of what she said; when one of her women rapped at the door, and sent in a slip of paper.— Imogen read the following lines, written in Italian:—

tf Suffer me to see you for five minutes.1 “ I await your presence in the music-room.

“ De Sou ville/* Imogen had only divested herself of her head ornaments ; and, although surprised at so late a summons, and unwilling under the influence of the emotions which agitated her bosom to meet her guardian, she descended to the music-room. It was still partially illuminated, and the servants were extinguishing the lights and removing the things. The chevalier was walking up and down with a rapid pace.

When Imogen appeared, the domestics retired; and the chevalier, advancing, took her hand, and led her to a seat.

cc I should apologize/* said he, cf for so “ unseasonable an intrusion, and must “ thank you for this kind accedence to my « request/*

98

THE NOVICE OF

“ By no means/’ said Imogen, pressing the hand which held hers ; “ but I confess “ I am anxious to learn the cause which *6 prompted it.”

It was requisite I should see you for “ your own sake immediately, as to-mor-“ row I am under the necessity of leaving “ Paris.”

" You, sir—to-morrow !”

“ I have promised to accompany the tc duke de Beauvilliers on his first day’s " journey.”

“ The duke de Beauvilliers!—does he <c too leave Paris ?”

“ He sets off tomorrow to visit his regiment e( now stationed in Bretagne.”—Imogen’s heart sankwithin her; the chevalier continued : “ But the lateness of the hour urges me to bebrief and explicit. You are the debtor “ of the marquis de Sancy. There are no “ debts less honourable,yet none thatcall for “ more punctuality, than those which are in" u curred at a gaming table ; and though the “ marquis de Sancy is what the world calls

ST. DOMINICK.

99

“ a man of honour, though France boasts tC not among her valiant sons a braver or more loyal gentleman, yet is he not the “ man to whom a young, a beautiful, an “ unguarded, woman-one too but—"

The chevalier paused abruptly.

“ I do not perfectly understand you/' said Imogen, equally hurt and surprised.

‘f Perhaps/' said the chevalier,I do no^ “ wish you should. Oh ! very long may the sweet and modest simplicity of your na* “ ture, the unsuspecting guilelessness of <f your heart, survive the resignation of the “ manners, the habits, and the pursuits, <( which once accompanied them."

Imogen felt the full force of this delicate rebuke j but she felt its justice, and dared not retort. She drooped her head on her shoulder, sighed, and was silent.

<« Forgive me," said the chevalier, taking her hand jff but, though I now cease to ob-“ trude on you the anxious solicitude of “ friendship, the tender warnings of ap-<f prehensive affection, still my heart bleeds “ in secret for you."

THE NOVICE OF

100

Imogen felt the hand he raised to his lips bathed with a tear; her own flowed copiously. Her broken spirits were sunk to the last degree of sadness and oppression ; her long smothered emotions no longer brooked control, and the various causes of her poignant distress rushed all at once over her agitated mindi

“ God knows/* said the chevalier, greatly moved, I did not intend to awaken (ut “ this moment at least) one painful feel-<f ing. I came to you in the dear capacity " of a friend s this purse contains the sum “ you owe de Sancy ; instantly cancel the cc dangerous debt, and—”

Imogen, still holding the hand of de Sor-ville, sank at his feet, and exclaimed, “ I am not worthy of this excess of good-" ness, for I have abused it ; I am not wor-“ thy of this solicitude, for I have disre-garded it ; lam not worthy of this con-“ fidence, for I have deceived you. The ct duke de Beauvilliers—”

Imogen paused for breath. The cheva-

ST. DOMINICK.

101

lier gently raised her in his arms, and, placing her by him,, looked earnestly in her face, and said :

“ The duke de Beauvilliers was known “ to you before you became his prisoner ,e at Laon.”

“ God of heaven !—you know then—?” “ I know nothing but what I learnt this ff night from the duke himself, when he t( left you. His confidence seemed the re-“ suit of the fulness of a heart, which I believe to be the seat of every virtue/* Imogen trembled in every limb as she demanded, “And what did you learn from “ him ?”

“ That the vicissitudes of war, and the rf spirit of romance, had brought him in ff the disguise of a Minstrel to the chateau u de Montmorell, where you were a resi-" dent : but that afterwards, considering “ it as a boyish adventure, he had request-" ed you to conceal the circumstance.” The tears which gushed from her eyes dried on the burning cheek of Imogen, and

THE NOVICE OF

102

she indignantly repeated, <f as such only ee it has held a place in my recollection ; ff but, trivial as it was, it ought not to have “ been concealed from you.”

“ Oh ! Imogen,” said the chevalier, <e why dare you not be always yourself— <e with such a heart—with such a mind !”

Then, tenderly embracing her, he mentioned the day of his return, and took his leave.

For a considerable time after the departure of de Sorville, Imogen continued on the spot where he had left her. The fluctuation of her thoughts had now subsided into one predominant idea, that the duke in his recent conversation with her had endeavoured to touch on the springs of her feelings, merely to become master of thé sentiments by which they were still influenced ; and that, whatever had been the result of his political investigation, he had endeavoured to make her acquainted with his through the medium of the chevalier de Sorville.

ST. DOMINICK.

103

“ He wishes me to consider all that has “ hitherto passed between us as the effects “ of a youthful and transient propensity/* said she : “ in the recently experienced “ feelings of a husband, in the sober affec-“ tions of a parent, he has long resigned “ even the recollection of those glowing “ and impassioned sentiments which once <f filled his heart and imagination ; he sup* “ poses he still traces in my breast the “ lingering flame he first illumined, and “ he would endeavour, in pity, to chill its “ ardor by the communication of his own “ coldness. Oh ! in that thought there is “ madness—to love, and in return to be “ but pitied—to suppose that a heart like “ mine could harbour an unparticipated “ sentiment, could still beat with the pulse “ of tenderness, when no kindred pulsa-“ tion awakened its throb ! Ah ! he knows “ not that heart ;—but, should he remain, “ should he return hither, he shall awaken “ from the dream into which his vanity, “ rather than his reason, has lulled him.”

104

THE NOVICE OF

The entrance of a servant, who came to extinguish the lights, roused Imogen from her train of reverie. She arose, and retired to her apartment5 but not to rest: for never had the Novice of St. Dominick, in her narrow cell and on her straw mattress, passed so sleepless a night as did the countess of St. Dorval on her couch of down, surrounded by every lure to sweeten and invite repose.

CHAP- XXXIII.

Nous errons dans des épaisses ombres.

Et souvent nos lumières sombres Ne servent qu’à nous éblouir.

J. B. Rousseau;

ee Slander beside her like a magpie chatters

“ With envy (spitting cat,) dread foe to peace.”

THE next morning Imogen arose, without one pleasureable expectation smiling at her heart : weary of the world, but more weary of herself ; lost to the esteem of him by whom she was beloved ; desert-

ST. DOMI-NICK,

105

ed by him to whom, though almost unconscious of her tender weakness, she still clung ; denied those enjoyments after which her soul panted ; borne away by those pursuits from which she derived no pleasure ; languid and dispirited, she sat down to her solitary breakfast, but arose without touchingany thing; and, placing herself her at her escruitore, began a billet to the marquis deSancy, which she meant to accompany with the purse presented to her by the chevalier. But her thoughts were wandering, and, while one hand supported her drooping head, the other held a pen suspended over the paper. From this intrusive train of reverie Imogen was awakened by an uncommon noise; while, amidst the loud tones of a man’s voice, the shrill entreaties of a female’s were discernible. The study in which she sat opened into the hall from whence this noise proceeded : Imogen rang her bell, and a servant appeared ; on enquiring into the disturbance, she was informed that it

VOL. IV.	F

106

THE NOVICE OF

was a person whom the steward had turned out of his room for being importunate, and who now refused to depart without seeing the countess herself.

“ And why was the person refused ?” demanded Imogen ; <f when had you or-“ ders to deny me to any one?”

So please you, my lady,” returned the laquais, it is not a petitioner, else I “ should not have refused—but a person to “ whom some money is due. Your orders “ are to refer such people to the steward.”

“ Admit the person, however/* said Imogen, with a faint blush glowing on her cheek.

The man opened the door, and ushered in a female of wan and wretched appearance, with a little boy in either hand, with an air of meekness and timidity, which appeared to have succeeded to a temporary flash of spirit : she curtsied low, while Imogen, advancing, took one of the children by the hand, and kindly enquired into the nature of the stranger’s busi-

ST. DOMINICK.

107

Dess with her, while she presented her a chair, and sat down beside her. The woman seemed touched by this goodness even to tears, and after a momentary struggle with her feelings said,

<c Lady, this is more than I deserve : but “ necessity—the suffering of those we love (( —a helpless family—will urge one to act in a manner they afterwards blush for. “ I knew too if I could once, only once see ■“ you, lady, the debt would be discharged, “ and my poor husband liberated.”

“ And am I your husband’s debtor}” demanded Imogen.

“ My husband is the person who furnish-" ed the silk hangings for your house, “ lady ; when he received your orders, he “ was just recovering from some heavy ft losses in trade ; the silk, with the gold “ and silver embroidery, he got on credit. “ He often called on your steward, but <c was always denied ; at last he was arrest-“ cd for the money himself. For six weeks “ he has lingered in prison under a slow

108

THE NOVICE OF

“ fever; while my children call for bread, cf I have not to give them ; your steward “ has put me off from day to day, and this cf morning added insolence to denial.” The woman wept—but wept not alone. Imogen's heart was full, and her eyes overflowed: she snatched the children in her arms, placed them at the breakfast table, helped them abundantly to every thing it contained; then, running to the escruitore, took the purse intended for de Sancy, and enquired from the woman how much she was indebted to her. The sum specified was about three parts of what the purse contained; Imogen counted it out to the woman, then presented a piece of gold to each of the children.. The woman looked at the money, then at Imogen ; but did not, could not, speak. Imogen, kindly laying her hand on her’s, said,

“ Do not be surprised at a common act ‘f of justice : the money so long due to you “ I have now paid ; but I must for ever be your debtor for the sufferings I have un-t( consciously caused you.”

ST. DOMINICK.

J 09

The woman dropt on one knee, kissed the beautiful hand that rested on her arm, then raised her eyes to heaven ; the tear which bathed them was no longer of sorrow, but thanksgiving, and the smile that illumined her countenance was the language of joy, too great to be expressed. Then rising, she took a child in each hand, and departed in silence.

“If,” said Imogen, looking after the little group, “an act of common justice “ can awaken so sweet a feeling in the “ heart, who can speak the peace and hap-“ piness of that life which requires no act “ of reparation ?—De Sorville, that heaven is thine.”

Imogen had not time to indulge in the apposite reflections which this little incident awakened, when a servant announced a gentleman by the name of de Marville ; and Imogen recognised in the person of an elegant-looking young man, habited in a military dress, her faithful friend, Theodore of Montmorell. He entered the room

110

THE NOVICE OF

in visible agitation, and when Imogen, advancing with an air of affectionate cordiality, extended her hand towards him, he received it with one knee touching the ground, and pressed it respectfully to his lips. His presence awakened too many interesting recollections to leave her wholly unaffected, and Theodore seemed intoxicated with her obviously sympathising participation.

“ Ah ! Madam,” he exclaimed, “ you are still then the same ; the same good-*' ness, the same condescension, the same unaffected graces accompany the ex-“ alted rank of the countess de St. Dor-“ val, as distinguished the meek humility " ©£ the Novice of St. Dominick.”

“ And you, Theodore,” said Imogen with a smile, “ are the same preux cheva-“ lier, the same flatterer, as when you “ used to study the annals of knight-er-“ rantry in the antique turrets of Mont-<c morell.”

“ Those were happy times,” said Theo-

ST. DOMINICK.

Ill

dore	’“ and yet/* he added, with a sigh,

“ I was not as sensible of my felicity as I “ should have been, as I should be now, were I again so fortunate.”

The young page paused abruptly, and coloured3 and Imogen, who felt the awkwardness of the pause, endeavoured to in-duce him to speak on the more recent circumstances of his life, but the generous conduct of the duke de Beauviliiers had rendered his adventures few, and his destiny fortunate. In endeavouring, therefore, to recapitulate the few incidents which had occurred to him since they parted, he pronounced only a panegyric on his illustrious patron, whom he dignified with every virtue, and adorned with every grace, which ennobles or refines human nature.

This was a dangerous, a pleasing, and yet a painful, theme, on which the greedy ear of Imogen could for ever feed; while, as she listened, she silently exclaimed, “ Alas! these virtues, these perfections, “ live not for me!”

112

THE NOVICE OF

Theodore also mentioned the late duchess de Beauvilliers ; but with such reserve, that Imogen could only learn from him that she was young, gay, and handsome: while she remarked that he delicately avoided making the least reference to the duke’s former disguise and residence at the chateau de Montmorell.

After a visit of considerable length, the page arose to retire, but Imogen would not part with him until he promised to dine with her the following day.

She had always meditated a liberal recompense for Theodore, for the material services she had received from him; and as she had learned from his conversation that he only now held the commission of lieutenant in the army, she determined on procuring him either by purchase or interest a company. The person most likely to assist her in the latter was de Sancy, as colonel of the Swiss guards, and to him she determined to apply as soon as she had discharged his debt : but the purse,

ST. DOMINICK.

113

almost empty, lay on the table, and in the perturbation of her spirits the preceding night she had forgotten to in quire /whether the chevalier had received the money from her steward, or advanced it himself. She rang the bell, and ordered the steward to be sent for. When he appeared, she demanded if he could let her have the sum requisite to cancel her debt to de Sancy ? The man smiled.

“ So please you, my lady,” said he, “ I <€ could not let you have the twentieth “ part of it. Monsieur le chevalier came “ to me late last night for that sum in your " name, and 1 had not a sequin to give “ him."

Imogen sat petrified.

The man continued : “ One would “ need to be as rich as twenty Jews to an-“ swer the demands of all the cravers that “ attack one from morning to night.,7 ff 1 shall write to mv agent in Provence w this moment,’’ said Imogen, “ for a “ large sum. Meantime do not add inso^ f 2

114

THE NOVICE OF

“ lence to disappointment, and let those ff at least meet civility whose just claims “ remain unsatisfied.”

She then dismissed the steward, and with a heavy heart sat down and wrote two letters; the one of apology to the marquis de Sancy, requesting his indulgence until she could hear from her Provençal agent : the other of the most pressing nature to the agent himself.

Imogen was not sufficiently versed in the manners and habits of the great world not deeply to feel the delicacy of her situation with respect to De Sancy. Her proud and haughty spirit had not yet acquired that elasticity which can bend to circumstance or interest, and the note which she dispatched to De Sancy was dewed with a tear of indignant pride. She trembled for the return of the chevalier, since she could not explain to him the cause of De Sancy being yet her creditor, without relating the story of the poor woman, whose children were starving, and whose husband was a prisoner

ST. DOMINICK.

115

by her wilful extravagance and total neglect of her affairs.

But in the midst of this train of unpleasant cogitations, the door opened, and unannounced the chevalier himself appeared, followed by the duke de Beauvilliers. The tear of wounded pride had not yet dried in the eye of Imogen, and surprise flushed her cheek, and increased her agitation to the most obvious excess.

This is an unexpected visit, I believe/* said de Sorville, affectionately kissing her hand, while the duke made a low and cold bow; “ but not to conceal my triumphs “ from you, I have effected what all the “ beauties in Paris could not—I have pre-vailed on the duke to postpone his visit “ to Bretagne until we set off for Pro-“ vence.”

Imogen started—■" Weshe mentally repeated. Never had the chevalier spoken with so little reserve of their union, even in private, and to herself.

(( In about three weeks/’ he continued

116

THE NOVICE OF

with a smile, “ your letter of licence will “ expire.”

Imogen, who knew he alluded to the three months allotted by her father’swill for her residence at Paris, faintly answered, “ I believe it will.”

“Suppose,” said the chevalier, addressing the duke, “ that you, .my lord, instead “ of visiting the chill regions of Bretagne, “ return with us to the genial clime of “ Provence.”

“ I am by no means so atmospherical a “ being,” said the duke laughing, “as to “ be deterred by an icicle, or induced by “ a sun-beam, to relinquish one journey “ or engage in another. The tepid gales et and glowing skies of Provence have tc now no charms,for me; mere situation “ has seldom governed my wandering — “ Society is the polar star by which I steer “ my course; and had Elysium itself no “ other boast than limpid streams and ama-“ ranthine bowers, 1 should find greater “ attraction in the social haunts, but less

ST. DOMINICK.

117

“ picturesque scenes of Mahomet’s para-“ dise. At present the literary hemisphere <e of England glitters with resplendent “ stars ; and, as soon as I realize your “ prudential theories, my dear chevalier, “ I shall fly to those attic circles where no-“ bility struggles to obtain the bays, and <f royalty* itself disdains not to braid its “ diadem with the laurel.”

The duke then mentioned several men of distinguished rank in England who wooed the muses; dwelt with peculiar interest on the character of his friend lord Brook,f and repeated a few of his amatory verses which breathed all the warmth of a true Anacreontic spirit. Thus, with the literary enthusiasm of a man of letters, and the elegant suavity of a man of the

* An allusion, perhaps, to the authorship of Elizabeth and her successor.

fThis accomplished nobleman and charming-poet ordered this simple epitaph to be fixed on his grave: “ Servant to queen Elizabeth, counsellor to king “ James, and friend to Sir Philip Sidney.”

J18

THE NOVICE OF

world, the duke continued to converse until he arose to take his leave, which he performed with the non-chalanle air of an indifferent acquaintance.

Not so Imogen:—her full heart had with difficulty controlled, with difficulty disguised its feelings ; her attention to the really-interesting topics discussed by the duke and de Sorville was constantly distracted, her remarks incoherent, and her air perturbed and restless ; while her eyes, now pensively fastened on the earth, now hid in her veil, were every moment moistening with intrusive tears.

De Sorville loitered behind his friend, and Imogen, trembling lest he should revert to the still-uncancelled debt of de San-cy, endeavoured to engage his attention by making her recent interview with Theodore the subject of their conversation ; by recapitulating the material services she had received from him; and by requesting bis advice with respect to the mode she should adopt to obtain for him some mili-

ST. DOMINICK.

119

tary promotion, the only kind of recom-pence it was probable his delicacy would receive.

The marquis de Sancy,” said the chevalier, “ is the person who could materially ff serve you in this business, and, as you “ are now out of his debt, you might with-ie out any impropriety apply to him.*' Imogen blushed deeply, and the chevalier added with a smile :

“ But I believe you had better leave the whole matter to me ; I am at least tf the safest, if not the best, person to “ whom you can make a request, and vvith-ff out any interest myself, I think I have rf sufficient influence with those who have, “ to make a captain of our little page : so “ pray invite him to meet me here to-mor-“ row at dinner, that I may get a peep at ff your protégé, and you shall present him “ with a commission as a bon bouche.” But how, how is this to be effected ?” demanded Imogen eagerly.

<c Oh, leave that to me,” replied de Sor-

120

THE NOVICE OF

ville gaily ; “ but remember, I stipulate “ for no primero for a week.'* He then turned the conversation to the duke de Beauvilliers. “ I suppose/' said he, “ you “ have heard that the cause of the duke's “ absence from Fontainbleau was the “ death of his infant son, who expired a (C few days back in the arms of his grande mother, the duchess de V—; on whose c< bosom indeed it had been dying since <f its birth. The duke has therefore been (( prepared for its loss almost from the mo-ment he possessed it ; yet 1 should fancy “ the secret regret it awakened influenced “ his sudden determination of flying from “ Paris, in whose gaieties he now seems so u little to participate. With all his supe* “ rior sense,” continued the chevalier, after a moment's pause, which Imogen had not the power to fill up, ", the duke is still, “ I fear, too much the sport of impulse e{ and ardent sensibility, and still retains much of that boyish romance of charac-" ter which led him in the humble dis-

ST. DOMINICK.

121

“ guise of a minstrel to the portals of the f< chateau de Montmorell. I had much “ difficulty in persuading him to give up <f his unnecessary journey, at a moment Cf when his absence from court might be highly injurious to him, as it is rumour-“ ed the king means to appoint him to <e some elevated situation in the military line ; but his disinterested favourite seems to value more the friendship of the amiable man than the power of the “ mighty monarch. He is indeed of a “ noble generous nature ; guided by a “ sense of honour, almost romantic, he has cf always sacrificed his interest, and some-“ times perhaps his happiness, to its re-u fined dictates ; and, wholly influenced by ff a spirit lofty, dignified, and indepen-dent, neither the lure of ambition nor <f the views of interest have obtained the “ least power over his heart or conduct, f‘ in an age when not to appear venal and “ selfish is almost to incur the imputation of hypocrisy/’

122	THE	KOVICE OF

Smogen, profoundly touched by the eu-îogium on de Beauvilliers flowing from the lips of de Sorville, agitated and silent, was unable to make any reply. The chevalier seemed not to expect one ; for, taking up his hat, and apparently not observing lief emotion, he kissed her hand, and took his leave.

A confusion of ideas, of sensations, for a short interval absorbed the mind of Imogen, and set any one object of reflection at defiance. Her perplexed and varying thoughts at last dwelt on the friendship and intimate intercourse which seemed to exist between de Beauvilliers and de Sor-ville ; and to the heart of Imogen it now adduced the double inference, that the boundless confidence of de Sorville arose from his entertaining no suspicion of the attachment which once subsisted between his promised bride and his friend, and that the conduct of de Beauviliiers was the result of that attachment having in his heart long since faded into the chillest indifier-

ST. DOMINICK..

123

ence. But in the faithful bosom of Imogen the rose of passion still bloomed ; and though despondency had long since dewed it with many an icy tear, it still preserved its vital warmth. It was in vain she endeavoured to conceal from her own heart its hopeless Jove ; it was in vain she endeavoured to believe she felt an indifference commensurate to that she had inspired ;— in spite of every effort, the idea of one object alone filled her whole soul, formed the spirit of her waiving thought, animated the dream of her short repose, called forth the slumbering blisses of her heart, or gave existence to her new-born woes; and though in the pang which unrequited passion shot through her breast all other ills seemed summed up in one, yet, in all the infatuation of tenderness, even to love without a hope seemed preferable to not loving at all. But, though that sentiment which now formed part of her existence was not to be vanquished, the policy of pride taught her at least to endeavour to

124

THE NOVICE OF

conceal it. Tortured by the conflicts of reason and inclination, of virtue and of love, the envied but unhappy countess de St. Dorval flung over her secret sufferings the gaudy veil of pleasure, and continued to deceive the world and herself by feigning what she could not feel.

New and dangerous speculations for the institution of new pleasures, attended with boundless expence, were hourly put into practice. She became the foundress of amusements hitherto unthought of, and continued to take the lead in all those haunts of fashionable dissipation which her spirit was calculated to promote, and her wit to enliven. But in those temporary self-retirements which night and transient solitude bestowed, her mind, no longer on the stretch, yielded and dissolved to the touch of sad conviction ; the flowery bandage then fell from her eyes, and, shuddering, she beheld herself on the brink of a precipice of error, whose yawning gulph seemed open to receive her. Then, ter-

ST. DOMINICK.

125

rifled and contrite, she clung to the bosom of virtue for safety, but even then found not the happiness it had once bestowed.

Amidst the restless and agonizing feelings that chased the dove of peace from the breast of Imogen, one sweet consolatory reflection had insinuated itself; for she had the happiness to reward modest merit, and to repay in some degree a material obligation. Theodore had returned to his regiment in possession of a company, and with a heart filled with the liveliest gratitude, and a respectful tenderness, bordering almost on idolatry, for his benefactress. He had received from her hands the commission the interest of de Sorville had procured for him, accompanied by a beautiful diamond ring, which Imogen, with a smile that enhanced its value, placed herself on his finger. The page received both on his knees; then, drawing from his bosom the little silver reliquary presented to him by the Novice of St. Dominick, he exclaimed in an impassioned tone :

126

THE NOVICE OF

ff Nor is this the least precious of all ct your munificent benefactions. O ma-dam! never has it, never shall it leave <c the breast whose heart holds you as the ct first object of its earthly reverence and “ adoration !”

Then, kissing the hand held out to him, he implored a benediction on her head ; and overwhelmed by grateful emotions, agitated perhaps by warmer but not safer sentiments, he covered his face with his eîoke, and rushed from her presence.

Meantime the marquis de Sancy had answered Imogen’s apologetic note in person. He appeared seriously hurt that she should consider his trifling debt as an object of momentary uneasiness ; assured her that a little deeper experience in the ways of the world would teach her to treat such trivial circumstances as they deserved ; and as he should always consider his money safer in her hands than in his own, he begged to look on her as his banker, on whom he should make no ceremony to call

ST. DOMINICK.

197

when occasion urged him. Though the proud feelings of Imogen were in some degree soothed by the insidious address of her elegant creditor, and she began to see the matter in a new light from that in which the chevalier had painted it, yet she deter-mined to cancel the debt the moment a letter from her Provençal agent afforded her the means.

y

Among the many whohad sought to render themselves distinguished in the world of fashion, by their attention to the most popular object of fashionable celebrity, the duke de Montmorency, with the exception of the colonel of the Swiss guards, was the most pointed in his assiduities. Governed by the manners of the day, but almost ignorant of that laxity of morals which accompanied them, Imogen took no account of that homage paid to her by a married man, but merely looked on it as the result of general and professed gallantry.

No sooner, however, was a splendid entertainment announced to be held at the

THE NOVICE OF

hotel de Montmorency, than it was universally reported to be giyen in honour of the lady de St. Dorval,* though the duchess de Montmorency was anxious to have it generally believed it was meant to celebrate the christening of her infant son.— Whatever was its cause, the expected fête now became the most general topic of fashionable discussion ; and twelve noblemen, whose magnificence and whosegraces would most contribute to the splendor and attractions of the entertainment, were selected by the duke to perform a grand ballet, according to the fashion of the times.

Imogen had already, among her numerous accomplishments, acquired great celebrity by her dancing, although she had hitherto but little opportunity of displaying

* For an account of this entertainment see Mémoires de duc de Sully, who believed it to be held in honour of a young lady who lately appeared at court. Even the gravity of the philosophic minister was not proof against the festivity of this ball, for he confesses to have performed himself in a ballet.

ST. DOMINICK.

129

her powers to their fullest extent in that elegant and fascinating art. Not unconscious,, however, of the excellence she had attained to in the graces and sentiment of motion, she readily acceded to the request preferred by the duke and duchess de Montmorency of arranging a ballet for the evening, to be performed by ladies distinguished for their beauty and their graces. Imogen selected for the occasion one of the most beautiful and interesting fables which the heathen mythology is enriched with—The Loves of Cupid and Psyche.* To the duchess de Montmorency she allotted the character of Proserpine, as e-qually adapted to the loveliness of her person and the dignity of her deportment; the personification of Venus she gave to mademoiselle de Guise, whose charms

* See “ Lettres sur hi Mythologie, addresses à £4 Emilie par M. de Moustier,” where this charming allegory is invested with new graces, and related ia the happiest and most poetic style.

VOL. IV.

G

ISO

THE NOTICE OF

might be truly said to rival the fabled charms of the Paphian deity ; the sisters of Psyche, subtle, artful, and insinuating, were to be performed by the young ladies d’Entragues and de Beuil ; the son of the duke de Montmorency, (by a former marriage,) beautiful as Love himself, undertook to represent the wily god ; and Psyche, the soul of bliss, the presiding deity of pleasure, was the character which nature herself pointed out for the'Iady de St. Dorval to assume.

The evening of expected festivity at length arrived. À variety of splendid entertainments succeeded to each other, each more attractive than that which had elapsed, till the Lovés of Cupid and Psyche climaxed the gay succession of festive pleasures. The ladies de Montmorency, de Guise, d’Entragues, and de Beuil, appeared flushed with more than usual beauty ; and though their performance had not merited the boundless applause bestowed upon it, yet had the rank and loveliness of

ST. DOMINICK.

131

the charming actresses obtained it. Yet still it was evident they only played the part as it had been taught them—they only sparkled with the beams borrowed from the refulgence of a superior light. But Imogen—Imogen alone was no actress. Having once fancied what she ought to feel, she soon felt all she had fancied ; the inspirations of genius, of sensibility, once awakened, the identity of her own character vanished equally from herself and her delighted spectators. It was not the lady de St. Dorval who fascinated attention and awakened the most intense and breathless interest ; it was Psyche! — it was the Goddess of Pleasure herself,, whose quick-changing vicissitudes kept suspence on the eternal stretch. Through the almost impalpable drapery that flowed around her elastic form, the softened outline of every symmetric contour, the flushing tint of motion’s glowing hue, wrere now betrayed, were now concealed ; while the rich but aerial folds frolicked with the

132

THE NOVICE OF

graceful play of every motion. Amidst the luxuriance of her golden tresses, the rosy braid of love entwined its blushing flowers; every tress exhaling â sigh of fragrance, every flower weeping with Olympian dew. Floating on the air rather than touching the earth, like the goddess of beauty, her celestial movements rather than her form betrayed the divinity.* While, as in the varied course of her eventful story she glided through the successive transitions of feeling and emotion ; now pale and drooping in the chilling languor of apathy ; now reveling in ecstacy, breath* ing bliss and flushing roses; now the victim of imprudentcuriosity, lorn by remorse, and wild with despair; now the object of envy and malicious persecution, every where opposed, and every where vanquished ;—the strained eye of wonder, of interest, of admiration, still pursued her mazy

* “ Et vera.incessu patuit Dea.”

Virg, Æneid. Lib. 1. line 410.

ST. DOMINICK.

133

flight, until the delighted but wearied imagination reposed on the magnificent spectacle of her apotheosis; and Psyche, reunited to Love, and deified by Jove, took her place in Olympus as the Goddess of Pleasure.

Never had the charming deity seduced to her shrine a more enthusiastic train of votarists than that which now surrounded her, while an endless echo was given to the plaudits of admiration which resounded on every side; and Imogen w’as almost literally, as well as metaphorically, deified ; for, in the midst of a little universe, she beheld herself adored as omnipotent, and worshiped as divine. But, if there had been eras in the life of Imogen, in which the ambition of superiority had been the ruling passion of the moment, it was only in the intervening slumbers of that sentiment, which, when awakened, absorbed every other, pervaded every sense, and animated every feeling—that sentiment which now formed the soul of her exist-

134

THE NOVICE OF

ence. She had begun her performance with a real languor, consonant to the fictitious apathy she should have assumed ; when foremost in the ranks of the admiring crowd, for the first time during the entertainment, lofty and towering above all who surrounded him, conspicuous in form, pre-eminent in manly beauty, appeared the duke *de Beauvilliers. Conforming to the festive spirit of the night, he appeared in a fictitious character, and personified the Genius of Minstrelsy ; his eye beaming fire, flashed the enthusiastic raptures of his art; his lyre, crowned with laurels, diffused its sweetest powers. It was from the soul-dissolving strains of that lyre the rapt Psyche stole her inspirations ; it was in the glance of that eye she found her apotheosis. The plauditory acclamations of a world vibrated on her senses ; but the look she sought, the look she received, sank to her heart;—then the world's murmur died on her ear, the world itself disappeared from her eye; and then

ST. DOMINICK.

135

she felt the immortality she had before but feigned. During the rest of the evening the Genius of Minstrelsy hovered round the goddess of bliss, yet attempted not to address her; the spontaneous language of their souls had already spoken in the communion of a look.

Intoxicated by her triumph, Imogen at a late hour returned to the hotel de St. Dorval ; and, faint, weary, and exhausted, retired to bed, but not to rest. The fairy visions of the evening still floated in her fancy; but the conviction that she was still dear to him, the object of her secret devotion, reveled in her heart. That bosom chord, on which hung all her hopes and all her fears, now trembled to the thrilling touch of bliss; and in the sophistry of her sweet and flushing emotions, she now fondly believed that a sentiment which could survive an everlasting separation from its object, invulnerably guarded by the chastest purity of virtue, the proudest dignity of honour, might be

THE NOVICE OP

indulged even in a heart whose vow of duty was plighted to another. But this belief, dangerous as false, was founded only in her wishes ; in reason, in truth, in prudence, it had no basis, and, like the lightning’s flash, it blasted while it daz-zled. Imogen was still too virtuous not to feel she ought to hope her love was hopeless ; but she was still too tender not to rejoice it was retarded. To virtue she was determined to sacrifice the happiness of her future life; but the transient beam of felicity which illumined the existing moment she had not the courage to exclude ; the character the duke had assumed convinced her his adventures at the chateau de Montmorell were still dear to his recollection ; and that the poetic fragment, addressed to him by the Novice of St. Dominick, had furnished him with the idea he had so elegantly realized.

On the following morning she arose,animated with the expectation of a crowd of complimentary visits from those who had

ST. DOMINICK.

137

made her the object of their devotion the preceding night, but still more by the hope of seeing him who had been the secret object of hers. Dressed in a simple but elegant dishabille, she descended to the library and took up the poems of the French Anacreon, Ronsard ; for she now seldom read, save in the intervals of expected pleasure or the languid pauses of expected society ; when an uproar in the outward hall caught her attention, and she dispatched the page who waited in the anti-chamber to learn the cause : in a few minutes he returned, accompanied by the steward.

So please you, my lady,” exclaimed monsieur le Brun, apparently agitated by passion, ffit is those vile mechanics, who “ weary out one’s patience and temper in a ff manner that flesh and blood can’t stand “ them ; so I ordered the tall Swiss porter ‘f to turn out half a dozen of them by the shoulder, and shut the gates in their face : but he had to struggle with the refractory tC knaves, forsooth.’"

138

THE NOVICE OF

ff And who are they ? and what are their demands r” asked Imogen, aimost trembling as she inquired.

“ Why first, my lady/’ replied monsieur Brun, there was Dubois, a cross-grained “ fellow as any in the kingdom, who fur-'c nished the hotel with wax tapers ever since my lady arrived in. Paris, for which " he never received a single sous.’'

'c And why did he not, monsieur le “ Brun ?”

“ Because, my lady will please to recollect, “ the sum destined for him last week in “ part payment was, by my lady’s good or-“ders, presented to monsieur de Servin, and no money has been paid in by the tenants since. Then there is monsieur Denis, “ who has furnished my lady’s table with “ the choicest wines, and whose clerk now <f made such an uproar about never having being paid for a single flask, that, by the ff rood, I was near chucking him into the st channel. Then there is old farmer La <f Moissone, who, though never clamorous.

ST. DOMINICK.

139

cf is more teazing than them all, who has “ provided my lady's menage during the whole winter; and who makes so much “ ado about his cattle being driven for rent, and his three fatherless grand-children, " and his brokn-hearted old wife, and the like nonsense. And then, marry, comes Mons. le Texier, as insolent as a duke forsooth, because, notwithstanding all the money he received from my lady, he has not been paid for the state coach. And then there is old le Mercier, the clothier, (< who furnished my lady’s liveriesand other articles ; and who, having become a bank-rupt, only sues for a trifle to support his f‘ wife and children till his affairs are set-<tf tied : and then—”

“ No more, no more, I in treat,” exclaimed Imogen in a tone of agony ; and, rising in greatperturbation, she added, “You have “ been greatly, greatly to blame, monsieur “ le Brun, to let those debts accumulate.” And what was my lady's poor steward " to do ?” demanded monsieur le Brun, with



THE NOVICE OF

a bow and a shrug, accompanied with the utmost sang-froid ; “ the money came in ie slow and went out fast, and my lady “ must have her house provided like that of other people of fashion.”

In what time do you think I may ex-fC pect an answer from my Provençal “ agent?” asked Imogen, as with a hurried step she paced the room.

Why, I think,, my lady, if your courier cc does not play the truant, you may ex-" pect an answer in a few days.”

“ Andin the interim, monsieur le Brun, “ what is to be done with these poor peo-pie ?”

Why, so please you, my lady, I have u a friend who lends money upon interest, “ and who would give you aiiy sum you <e might immediately require, on your " bond.”

This was a language Imogen did not understand : she begged of the steward to explain what he meant ; but even his plau-sive definition could not reconcile her to

ST. DOMINICK.

141

borrowing money on any terms from a stranger ; and her pride, united to her total ignorance of worldly matters, saved her from taking a step against which neither her reason nor fine understanding would have afforded her any protection. Besides, she dared not enter into an engagement unknown to De Sorville, and she trembled to give him any insight into the deranged state of her affairs, which since she had come of age he had not enquired into. She therefore decisively rejected the offer of her artful and overreaching steward. Having insisted that he should pacify by kindness, rather than irritate by insolence, her importunate creditors, until she should receive money from Provence, she dismissed him.

He had scarcely left the room when mademoiselle d’Enlragues entered it. The presence of her gay friend operated like a spell on the drooping spirits of Imogen, who, eagerly seizing occasion to shake off the goading intrusion of awakened con-

THE NOVICE OF

science, reverted to the pleasures of the preceding evening, and anxiously expected a recapitulation of those triumphs her flattering friend seemed always delighted to detail ; and, with a smile of gay expectation, she exclaimed :

“ Well, my charming oracle, my lovely “ Pythia, what says this prating world to-“ day of new or pleasant ? what says the <4 gossip fame of. Psyche and her fair at-44 tendant graces ?—ah ! a sigh !—that is “ an unfavourable omen.”

“ And when omens were unfavourable,” returned mademoiselle d’Entragues, embracing Imogen tenderly, cc was not the 44 Delphic priestess excused from giving 44 an answer?”

“Yes,” said Imogen, with affected pleasantry, “ to those who had not the 44 courage to bear the disappointment of 44 their hopes: but we, who sacrificed so 44 largely to Apollo last night, may surely 44 expect the laurel crown this morning.” “ You at least deserved it,” said made-

ST. DOMINICK.

143

moiselle d’Entragues, “ but merit and suc-“ cess are not always concomitant.”

<c For heaven’s sake what does all this “ lead to ?” demanded Imogen, in a tone of timid apprehension and impatience.

“ Why, that you are the most highly “ gifted, the most amiable, but the most iC injured of all human beings/' returned her friend ; “ but do not press me to be “ more explicit.”

I must, I will press you/' replied Imogen, eagerly ; suspense is the only suf-“ fering in which all temper, all patience a forsakes me—in mercy to my feelings “ then be explicit.”

ct Alas !” exclaimed mademoiselle d’En-tragues, in mercy to your feelings I <e should be silent, but I can deny you no-“ thing. You must know, my charming i( friend, I am but just returned from the “ Eglise de St. Denis ; never was there “ seen a more splendid congregation ; the u king and all the court attended matins ; “ the archbishop of Paris celebrated high

144	THE NOVICE OF

16 mass, and the sermon was preached by c* the famous Pere Justin. The duchess de Beaufort, who is preparing for her “ Easter devotions, came and departed i( in royal state : her litter surrounded by a captains guard, though all the prin-ff cesses were in carriages, stopped up the “ way for a considerable.time, so as a large “ groupe of us stood waiting for our equi-c< pages in the north chancel. The chit-ftr chat of the moment rambled from the <c eloquence of the Pere Justin to the new fe fardingale à-la-Beaufort; from the splen-“ dor of the fair Gabrielle to the dignified “ graces of the archbishop ; and from the miracles of St. Denis to the magnificent ff festin of the duke de Montmorency.— “ This, of course, brought your name in “ question. And where, (said du Fresne, “ the king’s chamberlain, addressing me,) “ where is your little Circe countess this “ morning? why is she not here to ex-“ piate by prayer and penance her sins of “commission last night?—Sins enough,

ST. DOMINICK.

145

44 o’ my conscience, (muttered the old go-44 verness of the household, as she stood “ counting her beads and fulminating 44 slander;) a fine example truly for our 44 daughters and grand-daughters ! I thank 44 my stars, I have never seen her in one “ of her Circe-like paroxysms ; but they 4c say no modest woman could look at her 44 dancing last night without blushing to 44 death. Christ! when such profligacy 44 is tolerated by people of the most dis-4‘ tinguished rank !—Aye, indeed, (echoed 44 the old and deaf lady d’Uzes, plaiting in 44 the formal folds of her stiff ru(T ;) but I i( believe this new-created countess has 44 not always been confined to private ex-4‘ hibitions of her talents ; for a certain 44 person said the other evening at the 44 king’s chapel, during vespers, that he 4- had actually seen the lady de St. Dor-44 val at the Teatro de Medicis at Flo-44 rence.—What! (said the lady de Noir-44 montier,) as a stage-dancer!—Nay, 1 44 say nought, (returned the old lady

146

THE NOVICE OF

" d’Uzes, with a sneer,) but I believe we t( all remarked last night how closely she “ resembled, in all her movements, those <f new importations it was the king’s good ce pleasure to bring over from Italy to ex-“ hibit at the Arsenal. Aye, folk are ne-ff ver satisfied ; things were thought to be “ at their worst in the days of Francis the f‘ First; but I say nothing. Well, well, (C (said the young de Rosni,*) be this fair u mysterious countess who and what she " may, had I a thousand hearts I would (i have laid them at her feet last night, ff for she looked, and moved, and danced, u like a divinity.—Yes, of the Cyprian or-der, added your protégé, de Servin; upon which there was a general laugh. " For my part, (said I, infinitely provoked “ at their malice,) I believe the greatest fault we can attribute to the countess de “ St. Dorval is her superiority over our-“ selves.—Oh ! she is your phoenix ! (re-

Brother to the duc de Sully.

ST. DOMINICK.

147

‘f torted the withered lady de Sauves, rais-“ ing her demure eyes from her breviary,) “ and indeed I believe her equal is not to be found.—Except (added de Servin) f< among the accomplished Almea of an Egyptian harem, the Baladieres of In-dia, or the dancing girls of a Turkish seraglio. Here there was another ge-neral laugh again ; and a. thousand sar-“ casms on the lightness of your new-in-vented drapery, the levity of your man-r‘ ners, your disregard of public opinion, “ and your general neglect of decorum a and propriety, were bandied about by “ those who think vice is sanctioned by the cf bulwark of a fardingale, and innocence ft shameless when veiled in an airy robe.

What rendered the whole affair doubly “ insupportable to me was, that I observed the chevalier de Sorville and the duke " de Beauvilliers among the crowd.”

And did they—did they—” faltered Imogen, with trembling lips and tearful eyes; but,choaked by emotion, she could not ask what she died to know.

J 48

THE NOTICE OF

“ Oh ! they certainly must have said <c something in your exculpation,” rejoined mademoiselle d’Entragues, “ but the buz cf and murmur was so great, and they stood “ at such a distance from me, I could not distinguish what they said ; and, dis-“ gusted with the malice and envy of this “ odious world, I ordered my carriage and “ hurried away.”

Mademoiselle d’Entragues then endeavoured to give another turn to the conversation, and talked of some new publications which had just appeared : but as Imogen, agitated, thoughtful, and silent, made no replication but by a half-stifled sigh or an intrusive tear, mademoiselle d’Entragues, without appearing to notice her emotion, tenderly embraced her, and took her leave.

The bitterest feeling of disappointment, of mortification, of wounded pride, and offended delicacy, bad now reached its climax in the bosom of Imogen. “ And is this then,” she exclaimed in an agony of tears, <f is this the world which has so long

ST. DOMINICK.

149

“ been the goal of my desires ! which my fancy peopled with visions of unfading pleasure, and that my heart sought with fondness, in the vain belief that within " its social circle I should meet with many ff a gentle, many a generous spirit to min-gle and associate with mine, in all the “ warm and pure endearments of sympa-thy and friendship. But who sympa-thises in the ardent glowing feelings of my soul! who participates in the friend-“ ship 1 am so ready to feel!”

The conduct of de Servin then rushed to her mind, more conspicuous by his ingratitude than the rest of her defamers by their wanton malice : that man, whom her praise had rendered popular, whom her bounty had supported, and herbenevolence relieved from those distresses incurred by those follies her charity induced her to lament and extenuate, in favour of those better qualitiesshe believed accompanied them; he it was who stepped forward from amidst the inconsequent and slanderous crowd, to

150

THE NOVICE OF

throw with the sportive hand of wit the poisoned shaft of malicious defamation, and turn those brilliant talents against his generous benefactress which her taste had discovered., and her liberality rewarded. Imogen, amidst her own individual sufferings, felt an additional pang in considering that the greatest gift it has pleased heaven to lavish on man, genius, might be found associated with the blackest vice of which human nature is capable, ingratitude !— Her fluctuating and unhappy thoughts then flowed towards the primary source of her recent mortification ; and she now felt, for the first time, the danger of innovation in those reigning modes which time and custom had rendered respectable, even though experience and truth had proved them erroneous ; and that singularity in opinion, manners, or appearance, however sanctioned by reason or approved by taste, must always render the individual who adopts it the object of popular opposition j since its very adoption is a tacit

ST. DOMINICK.

151

contempt of those established forms which popular prejudice holds as sacred. Convinced of the insatiable malice with which envy ever pursues supposed or real superiority, she now almost lamented the possession of those acquirements which rendered her the object of its peculiar persecution ; and almost panted to possess that common-place mind of humble mediocrity, which, unconscious of those powers that awaken ambition, or attract the shaft of envy, steals through life in sober tranquillity, equally free from censure or applause.

Alas !” she exclaimed, “ how much i( more respectable does the character of “ the coldly-amiable madame deRosemont “ now appear than that of the flattered, “ but condemned, lady de St. Dorval !— " And yet that woman, now almost the object of my envy, was once the object of my compassion, if not of my contempt.” At that moment the lady de Rosemont was herself announced ; and Imogen had scarcely wiped her last-shed tear from her

152

THE NOVICE OF

cheek, when the subject of her cogitation entered. Madame de Rosemont had come merely to bid farewell to her young friend. Anxious, she said, to return to her favourite residence, the chateau de Rosemont, she had seized on the opportunity of a nobleman and his family going to Picardy to accompany them, and intended to leave Paris the ensuing morning. She addressed Imogen with a warmth and cordiality unusual to her; pressed her not to delay her brother’s happiness by unnecessary protraction ; talked with some degree of energy on the extreme delicacy of her situation ; and, kissing away the tear that stole down Imogen’s cheek when she arose to depart, she exclaimed in-a tone of pity and affection,That that world, for which “ alone she lived, was unworthy of her.” This kindness and solicitude, expressed by one from whom perhaps she neither expected nor felt she deserved it, touched Imogen to the heart ; while in the last equivocal assertion of madame de Rosemont

ST. DOMINICK.

153

she perceived a lurking delicate hint of the light in which that unworthy world now beheld her. Inconsequent as she had hitherto considered the character of her phlegmatic friend, she now looked on the loss of her matronly sanction and respectable society as a source of real regret ; and, with a mind bowed down by mortification, and spirits depressed beyond the power of revival, from the successive and unpleasant incidents of the morning, she left orders to be denied to all who might call on her during the rest of the day ; anxious to conceal from the world those agonizing feelings, whose poignancy its ingratitude and malice had roused. She again resumed her book ; but her taste for such calm and sober pursuits was fled. She sat down to her harp, and arose from it in disgust. “ To what purpose/' said she,

continue to cultivate talents which have “ proved the bane of my peace ?”

She spent the rest of the day, therefore, in restless agitation, walking through

VOL. IV.	H

154	THE	NOVICE OF

those sumptuous and magnificent apartments, where every splendid article of furniture gave a silent reproach to her sensitive conscience. In the evening she called for her porter’s book : she found in it the name of every man of rank and fashion in Paris, except that of the duke de Beau-villiers, the only name whose absence could have cost her a sigh; but no femaie visitors appeared on the list, save the duchess de Guise and her daughter, who left a card written with a pencil, intimating her intention of leaving Paris early the next morning. This was what Imogen expected ; for she knew that the irregularities of the couut de Joinville, the duchess’syoung-est son, had induced his amiable mother to follow him into one of the provinces, whither, under the displeasure of the king, and seif-exiled, he had gone to prosecute his schemes of vicious dissipation unmolested.

The absence of the duchess Imogen felt more at this moment than she would have

ST. DOMINICK.

155

done at any other; and,, involuntarily pressing her kind card to her lips, she exclaimed, “ All my best friends are desert-ing me—and yet not all," she added, taking up a note from the chevalier de Sorville. The billet was simply an enquiry after her health, and expressive of a hope that indisposition had not been the preventive to his seeing her. She, gladly seizing the hint, returned an immediate answer, and pleaded fatigue and a violent head-ache as the cause of her confinement.

In the course of those reflections which occupied the mind of Imogen during the rest of the day, a new train of ideas gradually usurped the place of those unpleasant and mortifying feelings in which she had at first indulged. Merit and envy she considered as concomitants; since to possess the one was the magnetic spell to invariably attract the other. She blamed herself for being influenced by the gossip prattle of a few prejudiced and illiberal persons, and felt that the slanderous reports her conduct had

156

THE NOVICE OF

given rise to, were rather the result of obvious merit than violated decorum. To soar above the multitude, to hold some distinguished place in society, had long been the most ardent of her desires :—she had obtained it.

" And am I now,” she proudly exclaimed, “ to bend beneath those exertions “ which malicious dulness and envying “ stupidity are making to reduce me to “ their own level ?—No, I will teach them “ that, though envy loves a lofty mark, it “ may reach—but cannon pierce it.”

Led on by this delusive sophistry, with which the vanity or the ambition of youth so frequently sanctifies its errors, the next day her doors were again thrown open to the giddy, the dissipated, the unprincipled, to fashionable folly, to witty vice, and dissolute rank. Her morning circle was only graced by the presence of two ladies, madames de Beuil and d’Entragues : but never had her levee been more crowded by gentlemen.

ST. DOMINICK.

157

The duke de Montmorency was more than usually gallant, and the marquis de Sancy so pointed in his assiduities, as almost to distance every other claimant on her courted attention. She had just taken up her lute, and begun a pathetic little cantata of her own composition, while de Sancy in apparent ecstacy hung over the back of her chair, when the chevalier de Sorville, accompanied by the duke de Beauvilliers, entered the room. Imogen bowed her head, and attempted to continue her song ; but her voice trembled, and her fingers produced only discord. Endeavouring to do away her apparent confusion, she abruptly dropt her pensive strain, and struck into a comic roundelay of exquisite melody, which she executed with peculiar point and humour. The room rung with applause ; and she presented the lute to de Sancy.

“ No/' said he, putting it aside, “ I dare " not touch the instrument, except you have left some of your magic on the

158

THE NOVICE OF

“ strings ; for with me the superiority of “ your genius always counteracts the inspiration of your smiles, although, like u the breath of Venus, they give to every “ object on which they fall an animating power, which raises it above its ordinary condition.”

“ A refusal so couched,” said Imogen, smiling, “ is atany time worth an accedance “ less gallantly granted ; but if you cannot be amusive, you must at least be useful.” And she threw a skain of golden twist over his hands, which she gracefully and dextrously wound off on a little ivory reel that lay beside her on her embroidery frame. The men all complained of this enviable monopoly ; while De Sancy repaid the condescension which conferred it with a thousand little elegant and playful gallantries.

Meantime the chevalier and the duke stood conversing with the high constable at the further end.of the room, while their eyes were fixed on Imogen, who was in-

ST. DOMINICK.

159

dulging in a number of graceful and whimsical caprices, which at once displayed the pleasantry of her humour, the fertility of her wit, and the variety of her talents. The chevalier de Sorville at last approached her, and in a voice almost audible said :

“ From your note of yesterday, I almost <r expected to have found you alone to-<r day; instead of which—’'and he paused abruptly.

“ Instead of which,” said Imogen faintly, blushing at the dictatorial manner of the chevalier,<f instead of which you find raej cl as I should always wish to be found, in “ the midst of my friends.”

The chevalier shook his head, and as he seated himself by her he demanded in a low voice," Are flattery and friendship then " synonimous?’'

“ You have taught me to know they are “ not,” said Imogen, pointedly; “ but tc though the cup of friendship is a most “ sanative and nourishing draught, yet I ‘c must confess a little of the essence of the

THE NOVICE OF

f‘ delicate spirit of flattery would not render fi it less vivifying* or delicious: but by fiat-“ tery I only mean to express pleasant " truths.”

ft 1 believe,” said the chevalier, drily, ff there are some heads so inebriated and “ weakened by the fumes of flattery, as to tl be unable tosupport the plain but whole-“ some potion the hand of friendship pre-,c sents; for the lip which is embued with ts the luscious beverage of the former, turns e< revoltingly from the unqualified draught “ of the latter/’

Here the marquis de Sancy, released from his office, and playing with the cross of St. Louis that hung at his bosom, with a significant air was walking away, when Imogen exclaimed:

ct Come back, my lord de Sancy; assist “ me to argue this point with the chevalier. <f Come, and oppose your philosophy to ‘f his ; for you are both philosophers,” she playfully added,4f though of different sects : he sometimes draws his precept from the

ST. DOMINICK.

161

<c cynic tub of Diogenes—but you always “ steal yours from the transparent vase of <f Epicurus: his motto is. Forbear.’1 “ And mine,” exclaimed the elated de Sancy, “ Enjoy.”

Virtue, and no pleasure,” continued Imogen, “ is the chevalier’s maxim—but tf virtue united to pleasure is ours ; for I profess myself your disciple.”

“ And is virtue the agent or the object,” demanded the chevalier pointedly, in “ your philosophy ?”

“ Both,” said Imogen, stung to the quick by the manner in which this question was demanded :	for	there can be no pleasure

“ independent of virtue, though you may convince us there can be virtue without €t pleasure.”

The chevalier bowed, and remained silent. The keenest retort would have been more supportable than the mild tranquillity with which he received this little sarcasm. Imogen’s heart smote her; the sensibility of her disposition, equally alive to kindness 2 H

162

THE NOVICE OF

or to unkindness, the warmth of her irritable feelings/and the vivacity of her temper, had hurried her away beyond those boundaries her modest, affectionate, and unoffending, nature Jhad hitherto prescribed. Self-accused, self-condemned, she sank back upon her seat, from which a moment before she had abruptly risen, her cheek blushing at the unguarded sally of her temper, and her eyes expressive of the humility of her present feelings.

At that moment she encountered the eyes of the duke de Beauvilliers ; but no faint spark of lingering passion, no beam of sympathy, illumined their glance; it expressed but one sentiment, and that sentiment was pity. Imogen spake no more. The conversation, though general, was now languid and uninteresting. Her visitors one by one dropt away : the chevalier was the first to depart, the duke de Beauvilliers the last. He had outstayed every other except mademoiselle de Beuil ; and her excessive garrulity rendered his pensive

ST. DOMINICK.

163

silence scarcely obvious. She at last arose to retire, and presented him her hand to conduct her to her carriage. With an evident reluctance he received it;and when he took his leave, there was a lingering anxiety in his air, that betrayed his wish to remain.

Imogen, who had endeavoured hitherto to conceal the nature and repress the violence of her feelings, now gave them boundless scope ; she saw, the felt she was not only an object of indifférence to de Beau-villiers, but of pity, prehaps fo contempt. The vivacity she had lately assumed was only the result of her desire to conceal from public observation the strong emotions his presence had inspired ; and now which ever way she cast her hopeless eyes, mortification and disappointment met their glance. While the tears stole down her burning cheeks, while sighs of anguish convulsed her bosom, Beatrice rushed into the room, holding in her hands the broken fragments of an alabaster casket : flurried and confused

164

THE NOVICE OF

she endeavoured to exculpate herself from the accident which had happened, ascribing it to the carelessness of one of the filles-de-chambres, who in brushing out a cabinet where it stood had thrown it down. She then laid it, with the papers it had contained, on the table before Imogen ; and observing that her lady appeared not tohear one syllable of her apology, and that her attention was riveted on the papers that lay before her, she was beginning her story again when Imogen gently waved her hand to her to retire. Beatrice obeyed; and Imogen, trembling and agitated, drew from amidst the papers the picture of the Minstrel of Provence. Two years back, stedfast in the heroism of innocence and virtue, she had deposited this little treasure in the casket ; and though she had not the courage to part with it, nor the wish or opportunity to return it to its original, she had never opened the casket, which she had borne about with her as does the enthusiast devotee the hallowed shrine which Contains the relic of his tutelar saint.

ST. DOMINICK..

165

But now that it was forced upon her notice, now that it lay exposed to her eye, alluring her attention, almost soliciting her grasp, she had not, she wished not to have, the courage to resist the innocent temptation of gazing on it ; and she, who a few minutes before had shunned the looks, and almost rejoiced in the absence of the original, now hung in rapturous but melancholy emotion over his shadow. Even virtue forbad not the indulgence which love and opportunity afforded; for it was not the picture of the duke de Beau-villiers that riveted the eye of the countess de St. Dorval—the cold, the grave, the indifferent duke de Beauvilliers—oh, no: the heart, in the omnipotence of its tenderness, had annihilated the intervening power of time and destiny: it was still the Novice of St. Dominick that indulged the play of her enamoured fancy, it was the blooming semblance of the youthful Minstrel of Provence that fascinated her ardent gaze, and received the pressure of

THE NOVICE OF

her glowing lip. Again in the eloquent eye, which seemed to move upon the sight of her’s, gleamed the brightening dawn of infant passion ; still over the lips, where all the painters magic art was. lavished, the sigh pf half-breathed passion seemed to die. Every lineament, every feature, recalled some sweet stage in love’s first delightful era $ and memory, rushing through each successive interval of existence, still fondly reverted to that dearly-prized period, when enjoyment shed her roses over the felicitous present, and the vista of future life gleamed with the illuminating beams of hope and expectation; and still did the tear, which is dear to the soul, drop from the eye of Imogen on the object of its contemplation ; and still did the sigh, which the heart loves to exhale, breathe over the crystal that enshrined it : when ar deep sigh, echoing to her own, awakened her wrapt attention. With a convulsive start she raised her fearful eyes, and hurried the picture to her bosom ; then with

ST. DOMINICK.

167

a faint shriek covered her face in her veil, to shut out the form of him against whose semblance her heart now wildly beat.

The duke de Beauvilliers sprang forward, and, falling at her feet, clung to the drapery of her robe as she endeavoured to rise.

“ What is it you have to fear?” he exclaimed with emotion ; “ while the picture of de Sorville is still wet with the tears “ of thy love ;—oh ! precious tears !— while his semblance still reposes near <e the heart where he reigns unrivaled, “ what have you to fear from the presence “ of one whose only hope, whose only wish, is now to be the friend of both ? “ As such, as such only, do I now kneel at “ the feet of the countess de St. Dorval.” A bolt of ice seemed to shoot through the heart of Imogen; unable to subdue, unable to conceal, the violence of her emotion, trembling and weak, she again endeavoured to rise. The duke seized her hands.

■“ Hear me!” he exclaimed, “ in mercy

168

THE NOVICE OF

“ to yourself, oh ! hear me. It is for your sake, not for my own, that I now sup-“ plicate.”

Imogen’s feelings, wound lip to an ex-cess of agony, nerved her (almost fainting) frame with momentary strength. She burst from the grasp of the duke, but in the struggle his picture fell from her bosom. Vanquished, she sank again on her seat.

The duke still holding her hands in the clasp of one of his, with the other took up the picture, and exclaimed, “ I conjure you in the name of him whose—"

The words died on his pale and trembling lips; his eyes were fixed in a wild and doubtful gaze on the picture ; breathless and panting he fell prostrate at her feet, and hid his face in the folds of her robe, which he wildly impressed with a thousand burning kisses. For five minutes a convulsive sigh, a half-stifled sob, a faint and broken exclamation only, disturbed the silence which emotions too vio-

ST. DOMINICK..

169

lent, too great for utterance imposed. The duke held the hands of Imogen, and reposed on them his wildly-throbbing temples ; their pulse responded to the throb of his, and they were bathed with his tears. Imogen, dissolved and wholly overcome, had not the power to withdraw them: the duke himself released them, and appeared to search for something in his bosom ; then, with a shudder that seemed to shake his whole frame, he again seized the hands of Imogen, covered them with impassioned caresses, and exclaimed wildly:

“ Thou hast bereft me of every thing “ but my honour ; leave me, oh ! leave me “ that!—for thy husband is my friend!"

After the solemn pause of a moment he rushed out of the room, and Imogen sank back in a state of utter insensibility.

Recollection returned with less rapidity than life. All that had past, Imogen endeavoured to call to mind, like the scattered visions of a faded dream ; but the idea most buoyant in her memory Was, that she

THE NOVICE OF

had betrayed her passion for one who only called himself her friend, and who she believed pitied rather than returned the weakness he had witnessed. In the bosom of Imogen the feelings of wounded pride, of wounded delicacy, gave their colouring to every thought, to every supposition. She believed that the duke de Beauvilliers had come either as the herald of his friend's wishes, on the subject of their approaching union, or to warn her of the imprudence of her conduct, by which that union might be for ever dissolved. Yet he had found her lavishing the most tender ca. resses on his own picture ; he had beheld it bathed with her tears, and consigned to her bosom, where he might naturally suppose it dwelt a constant and treasured companion. There was madness in the thought.

“Oh!” said the weeping Imogen, “ had “ his spirit so associated with mine as to “ leave me no room to regret the secret I “ so unwittingly betrayed ; had my soul “ found repose in the acknowledged ten-

ST. DOMINICK.

wi.

ff derness of bis ; had he endeavoured to “ preserve me high in my own conscious-'f ness, and to convince me that, though “ dear to his heart, I was still more exalt-“ ed in his esteem, some ray of consolation “ had been left me: but, now the pity he “ lately felt is united to contempt, and he who supplicated me to save his ho-nour could hold no elevated opinion of <f the stability of mine. And yet that God, who alone sees into my heart, beholds <r the purity of my thoughts, and therec-titude of my principles/'

While tears of anguish still flowed down the cheek of Imogen, and she leaned de-spondingly on her folded arms, she heard the noise of a footstep in the anti-chamber. She had scarcely time to draw her veil over her face, and pick up the fatal picture, which she now almost beheld with horror, when a page entered, and delivered her a card: it was an invitation from the lord high chamberlain, in the king’s name, to a lottery the following day, when it was

/

173	THE NOVICE OF

his majesty’s pleasure to distribute some valuable trinkets, as prizes to the most dis-tinguished ladies of the court.

At a moment when the sombre hue of her thoughts led her to suppose she was abandoned by the world, because she fancied she was abandoned by him who was all the world unto her, she deeply felt the distinction with which she was honoured by this particular mark of royal attention ; and determined to avail herself of it, to appear with all her wonted splendor, and to convince the chevalier and the duke she had not been chid into submission by the stoical severity of the one, nor reduced to a state of hopeless pining sorrow by the indifference of the other. Such was the result of those inferences, drawn from the sophistry of a too-fastidious delicacy, the ardor of irritable feelings, and the disappointed emotions of a too-exquisite and unhappy sensibility.

ST, DOMINICK.

173

chap, xxxnr.

“ To know “ That which before us lies in daily life “ Is ihe prime wisdom.”

MILTON.

“ I’ve ta’en too little care of this.”

SHAKESPEARE,

NEVER had the inclinations of Imogen pointed less towards pleasure and amusement, than when, on the following morning, habited in Eastern though tasteful splendor, with an air of ‘f lifeless animation/* she descended from her dressing-room. As she crossed the hall to her carriage, she was met by the chevalier de Sorville. Struck by her dazzling appearance, he started ; then, coldly bowing, he advanced, took her hand, and led her in silence into the study, the door of which lay open. Imogen looked amazed—the chevalier closed the door, laid his hat on the table, presented her a chair, and coolly said ;

m

THE NOTICE OF

“ Give me leave to request an audience “ of half an hour from you.”

(l Half an hour!” repeated Imogen, endeavouring to veil the heaviness of her heart beneath an air of affected gaiety : “ my dear chevalier, in a moment so criti-tf cal as this, half an hour is half an age. c‘ I am going to courts and my carriage is £f in waiting.”

No, madam,” said the chevalier, your carriage is not in waiting, for I “ have dismissed it.”

Then, sir,” said Imogen, while her cheek glowed with the blush of indignation, tr you do but give me the trouble to “ re-order it ;” and she walked towards the bell.

Softly, lady,”eaid the chevalier, seizing her hand, “ you know not what you do: your engagements are doubtless impor-“ tant, for they are the engagements of u pleasure, the business of your life, and £f apparently the end and object of your _ft being ; but at present, madam, there are

ST. DOMINICK.

175

“ other claims on you of still greater im-“ portance, to which your ear must lend “ attention, though that of your heart has ei so long been denied them.”

The chevalier again presented her a chair, and Imogen, trembling beneath the haughty air of affected spirit, sat down, saying :

“Then, sir, let those claims be briefly <f made.’’

“ In brief then, madam,” he coolly returned, “ I come to plead the claims of the “ indigent, the oppressed, the defrauded; “ of those whom your blind extravagance “ has rendered poor, whom your careless ff resignation of your affairs into the hands “ of mercenary domestics has subjected to ‘c theinsolence of unfeeling ignorance,and te who long and vainly have solicited the “ fruits of that labour and industry which “ pride should have blushed to have wit-<c held, though conscience wras dead to “ their just importunities.”

The chevalier then drew a number of

176

THE NOVICE OF

papers from his pockets; and having gone over the names,the histories, and demands, of those which the steward had already circumstantially related to Imogen, he continued.

Here is another list of unfortunate victims of unprincipled extravagance. <e Here is an account of a long arrear to a #c mercer in the city, who, impoverished by the ill payment of the countess de St. “ Dorval and other ladies of distinction, “ has become a bankrupt, and whose ere-ditors will now apply for the money in a “ manner not so easily repulsed. Here is C£ a jeweller’s bill of immense amount, al-though he has given receipts for large fc sums ; the last article specified are a dia-“ mond aigrette., presented as a birth-day “ gift to mademoiselle d’Entragues, and u a diamond ring to monsieur de Servin, for writing a complimentary sonnet and setting it to music. This indeed might be cf deemed liberality, lady, in an empress, “ but in a private individual it is not only

ST. DOMINICK.

177

ff imprudent, but dishonest; for it is im-<( possible at once to be just and extrava-gant. The unfortunate jeweller is now “ languishing in a prison.—Here is the accounfof a poor tradesman—”

<f Cease, sir,” interrupted Imogen, endeavouring to hide the tremulous emotion of her self-reproving heart beneath the veil of offended pride; “cease, I entreat— cc where the bare recapitulation is insup-“ portable, the commentaries of sarcastic f‘ reproof, or the aggravation of oblique reproach, may be spared. I was ignorant until this moment of many circumstances <f you have related, without indeed much “ delicacy to the feelings of your audi-“ tress.”

“ Lady,” returned the chevalier pointedly, “ were not my auditress lost to every “sense of feeling, of principle, orofdeli-“ cacy, these circumstances had not been tc recapitulated, these commentaries had “ not been made.”

Imogen with difficulty suppressed those VOL. iv.	i

THE NOVICE OF

emotions which swelled her bosom almost to suffocation 5 and, with a dignity of manner that formed a strong contrast to the secret humility of her feelings, she replied:

“ In the over-acted authority of aguar-“ dian, the chevalier de Sorville seems to forget he has yet no legal claim to play the tyrant, nor ever may have.” tc Nor ever will have, madam,*’ returned de Sorville, firmly; “ Oh ! no; cc thinkest thou, lady, I would covet the fC possession of a heart which every cox-“ comb fool can boast of having touched ? thinkest thou 1 would associate my mind with one which, dead to all the higher powers of intellect, resigns itself to the “ influence of vanity and all her train of <f ostentatious follies?—No.	When my

‘f heart betrayed and gloried in its love, it “ throbbed with tenderness for Imogen, “ such as I then believed, such as I then found her, meek, amiable, ingenuous— f‘ the fond, the duteous, daughter—the a£-

ST. DOMINICK.

1Î9

u fectionate, the all-confiding friend—the “ tender, the refined, the faithful mistress— with a genius that soared above the er-e< rors and the prejudices of the world, not above its approbation or its censure. “ Such was Imogen—the object of my es-“ teem, the idol of my affections : nor will I violate the sweet recollections of what (t she was, by placing it in the scale of “ comparison with what she is. As she was, I would have cherished her, lived " for her, died for her—as she is—” Here the chevalier paused for a moment ; then with a low and rapid tone of voice he continued :	Those	engagements,	formed	at

“ her mother’s monument, and ratified by “ the voice of her dying father, I now for f< ever cancel ; those vows so solemnly ‘f pledged I consider as no longer binding ; “ and that heart, that hand, so freely, so “ voluntarily offered in a moment of virtu-“ ous emulation and ardent gratitude, I re-(t ject: and thus for ever dissolve an alli-“ ance it would have been misery, if not

180

THE NOVICE OF

<c dishonor, to have engaged in ! One fe word more, lady, and 1 have done. This letter, which I submit to your perusal, I received this day in answer to one you <e sent to your Provençal agent, and who “ addressed himself to me, in delicacy to ce your feelings. On its receipt I went to " your steward, from whom I collected “ these accounts, and learned the desperate <f state of your affairs; from him I also “ learned that your gambling debt to the tf marquis de Sancy was not defrayed. And now, madam, I release you from your “ confinement. Now, while Justice makes <c known her claims—but vainly makes “them; and while unrequited industry pines in hopeless imprisonment, or sends “ forth the supplicating sigh of poverty to “ unfeeling rank—but sighs unheard, let “ the gay, the thoughtless lady de St. Dor-“ val fly to her daily rounds of pleasure “ and amusement, fly from the importuni-ties of those whose miseries she has as-tc sisted to create. She is now at liberty.”

ST. DOMINICK.

181

The chevalier took his hat, and walked slowly towards the door ; but, pausing half way, returned a few steps—paused again, and fixed his eyes on Imogen, in the apparent expectation that she would address him, but fixed them in vain. A minute elapsed, and Imogen was silent ; her head averted, her form supported by an antique stand on which she leaned; the chevalier with a hurried step returned to the door, and faintly uttering e‘ Farewell for ever!” retired.

A quarter of an hour elapsed.—Imogen still remained standing in the attitude in which the chevalier had left her. The ray of transient spirit which had played in her eyes was fled, their orbs were dim and beamless ; the blush of indignation which had glowed on her cheek was faded to a deadly paleness. Shuddering starts crept through her agitated frame ; every nerve was wound up to agony; every pulse throbbed with feverish wildness ; and every respiration was a sigh that seemed to burst

m

THE NOVICE OF

the heart from whence it flowed. To this state of insupportable emotion succeeded a passion of tears; a burning heat flushed her cheek, while her trembling hands were cold as the touch of death, and her sobs were almost convulsive. She threw herself on a couch, and wept, till, faint and exhausted, her agitation subsided ; her feelings became soothed by their boundless indulgence; her flurried thoughts glided into a train of more calm consideration ; and all that had passed in her late interview with de Sorville recurred forcibly to her mind. Reproved, condemned, rejected, by him whose esteem was at once the stimulus and reward of all her more virtuous actions, her conduct for the first time flashed on her apprehensions in such glaring colours of criminality, as rendered even the representation of de Sorville but a faint and imperfect sketch of her errors. Her nice sense of honour, the rigid virtue of-her principles, roused from the torpor in which a heart devoted, with

ST. DOMINICK.

183

all its energies, to one only object, a mind borne away in the dissipation of its own ideas, had lulled them, and seeing every thing through the exaggerated medium of her own poignant feelings, she beheld herself in the light of a lost and guilty being, whose love of virtue had survived her adherence to its principles, only to render the stings of conscience more acute and envenomed.

She who a few days before would have considered the chevalier’s voluntary rejection of her hand as one of the happiest circumstances of her life, now looked upon that rejection as the death-warrant of her peace : for, deserted by him she loved, and rejected by him she esteemed, she had now lost all that the tenderest, the most exalted, friendship could bestow, without receiving that equivalent which love only could give. It was now she felt the weakness of that mistaken haughtiness of soul that had induced her to return the just but severe accusations of the chevalier with





■Pïr ^



























ST. DOMINICK.

185

addressing my answer to you, monsieur, which you will have the goodness to soften as much as possible.

" I could not raise the half of the sum she has demanded without a mortgage on some part of the property, or cutting down the wood planted by the great grandsire of my lady countess, or the grove of pines which lies to the left of the high road to Avignon, and which monseigneur the late count was so much attached to. And monsieur le chevalier must know, that the great number of gentlemen and followers maintained by the late count de St. Dor-val during the civil wars, when he almost supported a little army himself, (little thinking, heaven rest his soul ! that he had a young lady alive to spend his money when he should be no more,) so as to leave his coffers empty at his death, and no arrears whatever due by his vassals and tenantry ; besides all the produce of the estate being sent yearly to the league army, instead of being sold or consumed at home :

i 2

THE NOVICE OF

for many a time and oft have I bought pro-visions at Avignon, at the highest prices, for the chateau, while the finest produce of the lands was lavishing on the soldiery, who would afterwards come in droves and destroy our vineyards, and prey upon the vassals—but that was no business of mine.

Monsieur willtherêfore have the goodness to recollect how hard pressed I was to make up the sum which my lady countess brought up with her to Paris three months back ; and that I was obliged to bear down so heavy upon the tenants, that many of them threw up their farms, and went to join the royal army in Picardy during the winter.”

The letter unfinished dropt from the trembling hands of Imogen, and a pang of remorse, sharper than all she had yet felt, shot through her agonized heart.

When we suffer,” she exclaimed, 4* from the vices or the crimes of others, from a participation in public calamity, “ or the involvement of domestic misfor-

ST. DOMINICK..

187*

r‘ tune unavoidably incurred,, misery ap-<f proaches sustained by fortitude, and “ supported by resignation, dignified, not u oppressed, by the hand of chastisement. “ Our nature, like gold in the crucible, <f refines and purifies in its trial ; and the tf conscious heroism of affliction repays its " sufferings by the proud self-approbation “ it brings with it. But when surrounded by all those worldly blessings which " ought to act as the preventives of error “ and the inducements to virtue, we stretch ‘f forth a hand, and impiously plant the 6‘ thorn which rankles in our breast; when ft we become not only the author of our “ sufferings, but of the miseries of others, f{ by a careless neglect of our duties, or a “ voluntary pursuit of error; when the “ aching heart seeks in vain for one con-“ solatory recollection to soothe its re-“ proachful agonies ; when the long-slum-ff bering or long-rejected reason sends ff forth an anxious enquiry for one plau-“ sive excuse to plead the cause of consci-

THE NOVICE OP

“ ence, but vainly sends : then the gloomy <f soul can catch no fleeting beam of com-“ fort, and remorse seizes its victim, and fc consigns it to all the horrors of despair.”

This soliloquy, almost articulately pronounced, and proceeding from the magnified aspect in which her conduct appeared to her newly-awakened feelings, was succeeded by a shower of tears, and by convulsive sobs that shook her frame almost to dissolution. In this deplorable situation Imogen was discovered by one of her own domestics. Her groom of the chambers entered the room to enquire whether her carriage should again be ordered for the Louvre; an inarticulate “ No’7 was all the answer Imogen could return.

The chevalier’s having ordered back the carriage, his conference at such a moment with their lady, her remaining so long alone after his departure, and the state in which the groom found her, afforded a subject of amazement and surmise to all her domestics. The rumour soon reached

ST. DOMINICK.

189

the ears of Beatrice, who, with all the affectionate impetuosity of a Provençal, rushed into the room where her mistress still sat weeping, and exclaimed :

ff Blessed saints ! my lady, what is the “ matter? How is it possible to cry with “ such a wreath of diamonds on one's “ head ? Well, what every body says “ must be true ; not that I ever believe a “ word that is said in the servants’ hall : “ but if ever a chevalier in the realm “ should prevent me going to court were “ I a countess, why then my name is not “ Beatrice. The whole world cries shame on him for a cross severe guardian ; and “ many a fine handsome young nobleman “ would be glad to be in his place this “ moment, which monsieur François him-“ self told me; not to speak of his being “ a heathen, an infidel, and a hugonot, which every body knows, and moreover “ that he would as soon do a good turn for a Turk or a Jew as a Christian.— “ But sure my lady must be ill !—holy St. “ Barbara! what a pale cheek is here !”

THÉ NOVICE OF

,c I am ill,” said Imogen faintly, and endeavouring to give another turn to the sus* picions of her servant.

What, lady, a sickness about the heart, u I warrant?” returned Beatrice.

Imogen shook her head, and wept afresh.

Poor dear lady !” exclaimed Beatrice, <f that is a woful disorder. I had a cousin <f who died of it, although he wore a sca-fc pular round his neck which had been ff rubbed on the jaw-bone of St. Paul. It iC came on all of a sudden after he had finished a game of quoits, by which he “ lost the last farthing he was worth.— ee He died shortly after; and his poor chil-“ dren are now begging through the <f world. Christ be, good to us \'y

Imogen arose, dried her eyes, endeavoured to conceal her emotion, and desired Beatrice to give orders to the porter to deny her to all who should call. Beatrice looked surprised, but flew to obey her ; and Imogen, collecting the papers which lay scattered on the table, retired to her bou~

ST. DOMINICK.

191

doir; and, having divested herself of all her ornaments, spent the rest of the day in pacing her chamber with that restless agitation, that vague and desultory state of mind, which can repose on no one point of reflection, which can form no determinate plan of conduct. Thought rushed after thought in tumultuous emotion, and chased each other down as they successively arose.

At the usual hour a sumptuous dinner was served up ; and Imogen, to avoid the surmises of impertinent curiosity in her domestics, descended to the salon-à^man-ger. A number of covers were laid, but for the first time laid in vain ; for Imogen for the first time dined alone. She shuddered as she contemplated the solitary splendor by which she was surrounded and, having trifled with some sweetmeats, which a tear more than once moistened, she arose, and passed on to her own apartment, amidst a numerous range of domestics splendidly habited.

192	THE	NOVICE OF

The grey light of a winter’s evening, the faint beam of an almost-extinguished fire, which burnt in a brasier of a beautiful antique form, dimly lighted up the room, which Imogen still continued to pace with an undeviating step. The magnificent salon-à-manger, the sumptuously-covered table, the crowd of luxurious and indolent domestics, still haunted her conscience; while the sickly train of misery, the imprisoned tradesman, the impoverished farmer, the bankrupt merchant, and the oppressed peasant, rose in sad succession on her memory. The forms of de Beauvilliers and de Sorville closed the visionary procession which remorse had conjured up. The gloom seemed to thicken round her. With a mind almost frenzied she flew to the saloon ; it was beautifully illuminated, but it was empty, and darkness still hung on the mind of its solitary mistress. The porter as usual sent in his book ; two names only were registered in it during the day, the names of an ingrate

ST. DOMINICK.

193

and a creditor^ de Servin and de Sancy. Imogen trembled as she read, and returned the book in silence. The agent’s letter, which she expected would have enabled her to cancel her debt to de Sancy, had now arrived, but what had been its contents she shuddered to remember.

Wearied by the agitation of mind and body she had sustained, she retired early to bed, but not to rest. Conscience, like the hag of midnight’s witching dream, still pressed a deadly weight upon her bosom; and even in the transient repose which exhausted nature snatched from woe, the visions of remorse hovered round her pillow, and chased the spirit of slumber that would have lulled her cares into momentary oblivion.

m

THE NOTICE OF

CHAP. XXXV.

Un alma granda E teatro a se stissa—ella en segretto S’ approva e si condemna E placida—e secura Del volgo spittatore Taura non cura.

Metastasio.

Left and abandoned by her velvet friends.

Shakespeare.

THE next morning Imogen arose rather wearied than refreshed by the short and harassing slumbers of the night ; unable to form any independent plan of conduct, whilë the faintest hope of awakening an interest in the bosom of de Sorville lived in her own. So long accustomed to repose on his better judgment in every exigency, and, till within the last two months of her life, to be guided by his opinion and governed by his advice, she could now decide on nothing, until she made one struggle to regain that inestimable friendship

ST. DOMINICK.

195

which she had never so justly appreciated as at the moment she feared it was lost to her for ever. She therefore determined to write to him. But how reconcile the proud and haughty spirit of the past day’s conduct with the contrite and humble feelings of the present ? After having written and torn several notes, Imogen contented herself with sending two suppliant lines, bathed with her tears, and dictated in real anguish of heart, requesting he would indulge her with half an hour’s interview that evening at six o’clock.— The laquais to whom Imogen delivered this billet demanded, in the name of the coachman, if it was his lady’s pleasure the carriage should be got ready ? f< Certainly ff not/’ was Imogen’s impulsive answer; but the reflection of a moment induced her to recal her words, and the horses were ordered to be immediately harnessed.

At a moment when a thousand vague and gloomy presages floated on the surface of her imagination, every incident.

19(3	THE	NOVICE	OF

every circumstance, received its colouring from their predominant hue; and no female visitant having called on her the preceding day, and only two giddy and inconsiderate girls the day before, she fancied that her not having appeared abroad since the festin of the duchess de Montmorency, and her absence from the court lottery, might sanction the rumours of malice, and countenance those reports which envy was every day broaching to her disadvantage. Endeavouring, therefore, to chase the shadow of affliction from her brow, and the traces of remorse from her countenance, she entered her carriage, and drove to the hotel de Montmorency, concealing her face with her veil, fearing lest in every eye she should meet the supplicating glance of a creditor, or the reproachful looks of one whom she had injured. As soon as her avant-courier had announced her arrival at the hotel de Montmorency, the porter said, “ his lady tc was not at home when the carriage

ST. DOMINICK.

19T

turning round the court, Imogen cast her eyes towards a balcony that ran along the front of the hotel, and beheld the duchess de Montmorency leaning over the balustrade with several ladies and gentlemen, among whom she discovered the ladies d’Entragues and de Beuil, and the marquis de Sancy : they coldly returned the transient glance of the solitary visitor, but took no further notice of her.

Imogen sank back in her carriage, and a feeling of mortified pride, fora moment, swallowed up every other. Unknown to herself she was carried to the hotel de Bel* leisle. She had given previous orders to be driven there; and, though now unfit for every society, she had not the presence of mind to countermand her orders until the carriage stopt at the door. She to whom, but a few days before, every door flew open, now felt a momentary satisfaction that even one admitted her.

The marchioness de Belleisle, from being once so renowned for her gaiety and

198

THE NOVICE OF

charms, had now become a professed devotee; and when Imogen was ushered up to the apartment where she received her levee, she found her surrounded by priests, abbés, Jesuitical monks, and female bigots.

The witty and agreeable bishop de Rou-enne stood close to the door as Imogen entered it, and she gladly stopt to chat to him, and to spare herself the trouble of forcing her way through the crowd by which the marchioness was surrounded. After some indifferent conversation which she, with difficulty, endeavoured to support, she fancied that the usual free and easy manners of the bishop laboured under some restraint ; that his answers were more incoherent; his air confused; and his eyes were constantly turned towards the company, while the position she stood in concealed it from her view. Anxious to learn the cause of his abstraction, she turned round, and observed every eye fixed on herself, while every ear seemed to lend its attention to a person who, in a low

ST. DOMINICK..

199

voice, was speaking to the lady deBelleisle in the centre of the group.

The words a poor novice of the order " of St. Dominick*' met her ear distinctly, and the circle giving way, the forms of the lady Magdelaine de Montmorelle and the father Anselme saluted her eye. She saw she heard no more ! The mortification of her feelings had now reached its climax, and she would have sunk to the earth, but the arms of the good bishop received her. Touched with the tenderest compassion, while others gazed on her only with curiosity or triumph, he conveyed her to her carriage. The freshness of the air revived her ; she wept and pressed the hand of the bishop in silence. “ I pity you from my soul/' said he with emotion, and tc will persist to the end of time in believ-Cf ing you innocent.”

*f In believing me innocent !" repeated faintly the astonished Imogen ; but he had returned to the house, and the carriage drove on. Imogen threw herself back, and

THE NOVICE OF

remained in almost a torpid state until roused by the carriage being blocked in between two others. The one was empty, but the other bore the arms of the lord high constable, and was filled with the ladies whom Imogen had seen in the balcony. She now timidly shrunk back to avoid their intrusive glances, when the carriage-door was burst open, and two ferocious-looking men putting in their heads, one of them, with a Stentorian voice, exclaimed :— “ Come, lady, alight if you please, there is an execution laid on your coach by monsieur le Texier, the maker.”

Imogen sat immovable as a statue ; the ladies stretched their necks out of their carriage-window, and her servants began to expostulate with the two officers of justice, one of whom had got into the carriage, while the other held the lock of the door in his hand. A mob now collected round the vehicles; and it being generally understood that it was the magnificent equipage of the celebrated countess de St.

ST. DOMINICK.

20 i

Dorval which hail been seized on for debt, some contented themselves with looking in at the carriage-window, and walking away with a shrug of compassion ; and others remained to see the business out, loudly declaring u that it was easy to make a fig-ure at other folks’ expence.3t A gentleman now advanced from amidst the crowd, and, with a respectful air, entreated the countess de St. Dorval would permit him to place her in the empty carriage, which he ordered to draw up close to her own, until this unpleasant mistake could be settled. Imogen, confused, overwhelmed, bewildered, suffered him to lead her out of her own carriage, and place her in the other. As she passed to it, she observed de Servin amongthe crowd, who coldly bowed to her, and then turned towards the ladies in the carriage with a sneer.

This little incident operated like an elixir on the fading spirits of Imogen ; this instance of human turpitude, of depravity, and ingratitude, weighed against her own VOL. iv.	k

202

THE NOVICE OF

errors,, made them appear but a feather in the scale. With some degree of comparative self-satisfaction, she turned towards the stranger to thank him for his humanity and attention, and discovered him to be the lord de Chateauneuf, at the expense of whose appearance and character she had amused herself with the marquis de Sancy on the day of her first appearance at court. Her transient beam of self-complacency expired, and with great difficulty she assured him of that gratitude she so profoundly felt. At the same moment one of the officers of justice mounted the coach-box of her carriage, and drove it away amidst the loud huzzas of the mob; while the vehicle in which De Chateauneuf had placed her drove towards the hotel de St. Dorval, followed by her servants on foot.

In spite of the sufferings, the trials, the mortification she had this day undergone, one faint ray of hope smiled on the gloomy horizon of her fate—the faint expectation of a propitious answer from the chevalier

ST. DOMINICK.

203

de Sorville. As soon as she reached her own apartment, to which she hurried the moment she arrived at home, she sent for the laquais whom she had intrusted with her billet ; he gave her a letter ; with trembling hands she opened it—it was her own. Unable to speak, she looked up in her servant’s face for an explanation : he said he had called at the gentleman’s house where the chevalier resided ; that he only found there the house steward and a femme de charge; that from them he learned the family had gone to their seat in Gui-enne two days back ; and that early on that morning the duke de Beauvilliers had called in a traveling carriage on the chevalier de Sorville, who went off with him, the chevalier’s servant having set off the night before with his luggage, and that they believed the chevalier and the duke were going to England.

“ Then I have not a friend on earth !” exclaimed Imogen, in an accent of despair, and, unmindful of her servant, burst into

204

THE NOTICE OF

tears. “ The God of goodness forbid !” said the laquais, wiping his eyes; “ it were a pity “ of pities that you, lady, should want a “ friend yourself, who have been a friend “ to so many.”

Imogen shook her head and wept bitterly . the laquais retired with a bow lower than usual, and monsieur le Brun entered at the same moment without any bow at all.

The steward was laden with papers, which he threw down on a table before Imogen : “ These are a few small bills, lady,” said he, “ which people have sent “ in to-day who would never have thought “ of being importunate but for some ugly “ rumours which are beginning to circulate “ on every gide • and, besides, here is “ Etienne the valet-de-place, and Adri-“ enne the avant-courier, and Ambrose “ and Robichon, my lady’s head grooms, “ and messieurs Bernardine and Eustaches, <c the two first laquais, who all demand their “ discharges or their wages.”—'They shall have both/’ said Imogen, in a tone

ST. DOMINICK.

205

of firmness.—><f Marry, here are their ac-ff counts, lady ; they have been more re-gulary kept than paid, that is certain,” continued monsieur le Brun, turning over the leaves of a large book. ff As for myself, <f I am willing to continue the faithful ser-“ vant of my lady countess, if it is her “ good pleasure, although I have the of-fer of an excellent situation from the lady governess of the royal household, (e with a chance of being made one of “ these days a yeoman of the buttery.”

“ Monsieur le Brun,” said the countess de St. Dorval haughtily, “leave your own “ account with those of my other servants; ff send me all the books, bills, and papers, “ you have of mine at present in your “ hand, and inform my domestics they shall “ all be paid and discharged before to-ff morrow evening.”

“ All, lady?” repeated the steward. c? All,” returned Imogen, with the “ exception of the few persons I brought “ with me from Provence and the laquais

THE NOVICE OF

“ who just left the room; with them it shall be optional to remain or go.” ff And my lady’s humble servant?” Shall be among the first to depart,” said Imogen, with a tone of decision.

Monsieur le Brun shrugged his shoulders, bowed, and retired. In a few minutes he returned with the rest of the accounts he had in his hands; he laid them before Imogen, repeated their vast amount with a significant air, and then endeavoured to expostulate with his lady.

“ Monsieur le Brun,” said Imogen, <f you may retire.” The mortified steward obeyed. The heart of the oppressed and suffering Imogen was too full, her pride too deeply wounded, her feelings too dreadfully lacerated by the ingratitude of those who had reveled in the comforts her liberal heart had delighted to lavish on them, who had so long enjoyed those luxuries her thoughtless bounty had provided them, to enter into any argument with her faithless steward ; besides, that every re-

ST. DOMINICK.

207

proach she would have pointed at him must have aimed an oblique opprobrium at herself. “ Well/' said she, ff may a “ mercenary domestic have slumbered *c over the interest and betrayed the con-se fidence of his too-confiding mistress, ff when she herself favoured the cheat, ft and became the willing accessary to her “ own ruin.”

It is under the pressure of great and sudden exigencies that the faculties of a strong and comprehensive mind awaken to a full sense of their own power. The spell of golden prosperity which, like the torpedo’s touch, lulls the object of its influence into soft and senseless slumbers, once broken by the powerful decharm of unexpected evil or sudden afflictions, the energies of the superior but long-dormant soul rouse into boundless activity, and genius, (emanation of heaven !) even though tortured from its native bias to a foreign course, and forced from the soaring flight of its elevated views to the humble level

208	THE	NOVICE OF

of common-place concerns, still displays itself fruitful in expedients and successful in efforts to obviate or to vanquish those evils which mere intellectual mediocrity would shrink from encountering, or sub* mit to rather than oppose. Abandoned by the world, equally deserted by her enemies and her friends, thrown upon herself for counsel and exertion, the mind of Imogen revolved into itself, and became armed against all the contingent evils which hung, with impending ruin over her head. Firm and collected, she determined not only to oppose but break the shock: as when the omniscient eye of nature beholds the distant-gathering cloud surcharged with the electric flame that threatens violation to the harmony of her system, suddenly she interposes her watchful power, and by one great and extraordinary effort restores the equilibrium to the scale of universal order.

With a calm and steady circumspection Imogen now examined the state of her af-

ST. DOMINICK.

209

fairs, including the past, the present, and the future, circumstances of her life ; then, with one heart-exhaled sigh to the memory of that pure that noble friendship she had for ever forfeited,, with a sigh less articulate but more profound, breathed in tender anguish to the dear and soft recollection of that once all-pervading sentiment which even in the grasp of misery, in the returning strength of heroism and of virtue, still awakened one faint thrill of rapture on the almost-torpid nerve of bliss, she shook off the leavings of her weak-“ ness,” and devoted every energy of her strong mind to the retrieval of her affairs. Among the brilliant and fascinating accomplishments which art and science had lavished on her, her guardian had forced one humble but necessary acquirement. He had made heran excellent accountant, and Imogen now, for the first time, derived a serious benefit from her arithmetical skill. Having arranged all her papers, looked over her books, and examined even k 2

210

THE NOVICE OF

the minutest bill and most trivial account, she made herself mistress of the full amount of her debts. She then examined her rent-roll, and rendered the/ general state of her affairs the object of her immediate consideration. Those shadows, which remorse, sensibility, and amazement, had cast over the perceptions of her mind, now gradually evaporated; and she felt that, however pressed down by immediate distress, however importuned by heavy and present demands, this source of suffering could be but transient, (although the remorse arising from it would be eternal,) for, that, though now without a livre in her possession, and indebted many thousands, she was yet mistress of a noble and rising property, which, though not immediately, must be inevitably productive, even though she prevailed on the chevalier to accept of that partition which, according to her father’s will, she had justly forfeited, since she was the efficient cause of the dissolution of their projected alliance.

ST. DOMINICK.

211

To remove, therefore, the acute distresses of the impending hour was the object of her anxiety and consideration.— Possessed of as much judgment as refined taste, she knew the full value of her beautiful collection of paintings, statuary, coins, natural and artificial curiosities, &c. &c. which, at such an immense expense, she had brought from Italy. The bills that lay before her fatally convinced her of the great value of the jewels, plate, and furniture, which she had purchased, besides those which bad descended to her by inheritance; and in what manner to transmute these rich possessions into specie, to answer the purposes of present exigency, she was still revolving in her mind on the evening of that day her feelings had encountered so many mortifying trials, when Jaques, the laquais already mentioned, entered the room: cautiously closing the door after him, he advanced with a respectful bow, and demanded, “ if the por-“ ter had received orders to deny his lady f< to every person who should call.-”

212

THE NOVICE OF

“ That were unnecessary, I believe,” said Imogen, with a sigh 5 “ has any one “ called. Jaques ?”

Not a Christian squî, lady, save an el-“ derly gentleman, who is now waiting be-tc low in the great hall to know if my lady " will do him the honour to admit him on <f very particular business/’

“ Knowest thou not who he is, Ja-ques?” demanded Imogen, somewhat surprised at the lateness of the visit.— “ Marry, no, lady ! not I ! but he seems <c a person of no great condition, and very “ feeble withal, poor soul.”

“ Some unfortunate creditor,” thought Imogen, sighing; fk if so, I must not deny ff him an audience. He at. least has a right to complain, and I to listen, though fC I cannot for the present alleviate.” She then desired Jaques to shew the gentleman up.”

Jaques opened the door, then after a moment’s pause, he closed it, and advanced, with another bow, to Imogen. My

ST. DOMINICK.

2\3

ff lady/' said he, “ will pardon the free-“ dom of her servant, but my heart mis-“ gives me with respect to this stranger, " for, the holy saints guard us from evil! " I do believe he is neither better nor “ worse than a Jew, and I trow my lady ff might have some objection.”

ff None in the least, good Jaques,” said Imogen, with a faint smile ; you may re-“ main, however, in the anti-chamber un-til he departs.”

Jaques departed, and in a few minutes returned with the stranger.

It was a figure of uncommon interest that now presented itself to the eye of Imogen : the stranger seemed weighed down with years and infirmity; his thin form was wrapt in a long black mantle, his face almost concealed by a profusion of grey hair, and his flowing beard descending to his girdle, white with the snow of age; he was supported by a long white staff; he bowed low, and accepted without ceremony of the chair which Imogen pre-

214

THE NOVICE OF

sented him. The dim blaze of a wood fire flashed on the whiteness of his hair and beard, and tinged his sallow cheek with a faint glow, though it did not render his features discernible. Imogen, almost awestruck, remained fora moment silent, then politely inquired into the nature of his business. In a low voice and foreign accent he replied,—To serve you, young iC lady ; the world,” he added after a short pause, “ calls me usurer, because I have enriched myself by relieving the ff necessities of those who, by their own unguarded and careless liberality, by the villany of others, or unavoidable misfor-tunes, have been plunged in pecuniary " difficulties. The world which calumni-“ ates me, which has ruined you, now tri-“ umphs over the destruction it has caused, and sends forth the tale of thy undoing by a thousand tongues. You are in “ debt, lady, but you are honest ; you have property, I have money, and the law provides equally for the security of the

ST. DOMINICK..

215

cf borrower and the lender; need I say ff more?”

The profession of the person before her now at once struck on the apprehension of Imogen ; his character, she thought, at once lay open to her. It appeared a union of worldly prudence and integrity, and while she felt greatly shocked at the publicity which rumour had already given to her distress, she was pleased that it had been the means of raising up for her a source of relief which, though literally but a necessary evil, under the influence of her present emotions appeared to her a positive good. Interested by his appearance, touched by his manner, Imogen, in a tremulous tone, replied, “ I 44 eagerly embrace your offered services ; “ you do me justice in believing I am ho-ff nest, though imprudent, and that it is not from a want of principle, but from Cf the want of a due exertion of my own mind, and a blameable negligence of

216

THE NOVICE OF

“ my own affairs, that my present difficul-“ ties arise. ”

“ And yet/' said the usurer, “ even in c my humbie walk of life, the riimour of the lady de St. Dorval’s genius, her wit, " her talents, have reached me.”

A faint hectic of lingering ambition tinged the pale cheek of Imogen. “ The iC world,” said she, always speaks in “ terms of exaggeration, and the faults or “ the perfections of the object of its ca-“ pricious notoriety are always viewed in <e a magnified aspect. Although I did “ possess those talents ascribed to me, I “ fear it would be no inviolable security “ for the prudence of my conduct, for ge-“ nius itself is not inseparably connected “ with that plain' sense of which prudence “ is the legitimate offspring.”

The fire emitted a transient flame, and the eye of the usurer as it met the glance of Imogen sparkled with a beam that seemed not coeval with the snow of his beard. Cf And what, lady,” said he, Cf may

ST. DOMINICK.

217

“ be the amount of the sum you require ?” Imogen called for lights. The usurer begged to be permitted to wear his hat, unable, from the weakness of his eyes, to encounter the blaze of the tapers ; and Imogen, as soon as they appeared, drew a paper from her escrutoir, and presenting it to him, said,“ This is an account of “ what 1 owe, which includes the amount “'of what I want.”

The usurer put on his spectacles, looked deliberately over the paper, shock his head, and returned it to Imogen.

“ It is a great deal,” said Imogen, anxiously, “ but I have plate, jewels, furni-Cf ture, and paintings, which cost four “ times the sum, and if I could dispose of “ them—”

The usurer drew back in apparent surprise. <c And why, lady,” said he, not borrow a sum on your estate in prefer-ence? It would at least be a less humi-“ bating mode of raising money.”

" Perhaps it would,” said Imogen firmly,

218

THE NOVICE OF

“ but when we have humbled ourselves in “ the eyes of the worthy and the good, we “ are not to hesitate at the sacrifice of our pride to the retrieval of our honour and integrity, in fear of what that part of the ct world may say, of whose opinions only we should stand independent. Besides, to “ be candid with you, sir, I do not think I have that right over my property you seem to infer. It was bequeathed me in tc trust for a race yet unborn, by -my an-“ cestors, to be handed down to others free ‘f and unincumbered as I received it; nor “ shall my sins be visited on the head of my41 (t successor. I must also inform you that upon the St. Dorval estate I have only in part a claim; my father having bequeath-ed the half of his property to a gentleman in case of a certain failure on my part, which has taken place.’’ Imogen smothered a rising sigh, and closed her eye on the tear that would have escaped its fringed curtain.” The usurer walked awray; then, after a moment's silence, returned, and said :

ST. DOMINICK.

219

f< A report of this circumstance, lady, has already reached me.”

You will find my personal property,” said Imogen, quite sufficient for the sum “ I shall want.”

The usurer begged to see her jewels. Imogen produced them from a cabinet. tf These,” said she, opening a box, are “ the family jewels bequeathed me by my father. These I would not dispose of ; but I should be glad to borrow on them “ what you could with safety lend until I shall have it in my power to retrieve them.

“ These,” taking out another casket, are the jewels I have purchased myself; “ they are, perhaps, less valuable, but they " are more modernly set. These I would “ gladly dispose of; here is the bill of “ what they cost ; I am sorry to say it is “ not yet half-paid.”

The usurer looked over the jewels and the jeweller’s bill; then, after a few minutes’ hesitation, he put his hand in his bo-

THE NOVICE OF

som, drew out a leather purse, and counted out the sum specified. Imogen looked amazed. “ I purchase these,\a continued the usurer, cf at the price they cost you, tc merely to convince you that the confi-c< dence you seem to place in a stranger “ will not be betrayed, and that my wishes “ to serve you are disinterested. As for “ your family jewels, lady, they lie under “ the same objection as you have advanced iC for the inviolable preservation of your “ estate.

“ As for your statues and paintings, al-<e though I am no great judge of such <f things, yet I can form a pretty just estimate of their value; first, from their “ having been hitherto rare, and now be-“ coming the fashion in France, and next €e because they belonged to the Countess ic de St. Dorval. Virtu has, as yet, made ct but little progess at Paris, although te now it is beginning to be universally af-“ fected. You have lived in Italy, 1 am e( told ; you are an artist ; your taste is

ST. DOMINICK.

221

fî esteemed infallible ; and those who have “ not the judgement to choose for them-selves will give any price for what you fe have already chosen. The same argu-ment holds good with respect to your musical instruments, furniture, equipa-ges, &c. &c. &c. I will therefore give you what you paid for them without en-<c dangering myself, and you will be con-vinced that you have got into safe “ hands.”

Not only into safe but liberal hands/* said Imogen, struck by the generosity of the stranger’s conduct, and I gratefully “ close with your proposal.”

But will you have any objection to have them put up to public sale ?” demanded the usurer.

In my own house?” asked Imogen faintly.

‘fWhyno, lady, not in your own house ; I will take an inventory of them, and <f have them sent to mine, where my ne-phew exercises the profession of a bro-

222

THE NOVICE OF

c‘ker; but then they must be publicly “ known to be yours, or I should lose by u the purchase.”

Between the pride and the rectitude of Imogen a momentary struggle took place; but her nervous mind soon regained its strength of tone, and the dignity of principle soon obtained the ascendancy over the lingering weakness of proud but false de-licacy.

Cf Be it so,” she replied, in a tone of decision. My demand for money is dread-“ fully pressing. I have some debts of honour I am peculiarly anxious to can-fc cel. My numerous creditors are inces-“ sant in their importunities, and even my “ own domestics are become insolent “ from—Imogen could not finish what she was about to say, and, in spite of every endeavour, a tear dropt on the diamond cross she was absently rubbing with her handkerchief. The usurer took the cross from he; hand, and, bending his head over it> murmured in a low voice, Precious

ST. DOMINICK.

2 23

€C gem !** then laid it down on the table, and turned his head towards the fire. A pause of a moment ensued. The usurer then told Imogen she should have the money early on the following morning.— ef Then,” said Imogen, “ I wish you would “ take an inventory of the valuables you are to have for it to-night.” To this the usurer consented.

Accompanied by the usurer, who crept feebly along by her side, followed by a page, who carried a light, and by monsieur le Brun, who was to draw out the inventory, Imogen proceeded through the apartments of the hotel de St. Dorval : her heart sank within her bosom in spite of every effort to support its weakness, as, by the glimmering beam of a solitary taper, she viewed those splendid but now deserted rooms, once the gay scenes of all her triumphs and brilliant illusions. From the sumptuous salon-à-manger she passed to the elegant and well-furnished library, and from thence to that favourite apartment

224

THE NOVICE OF

where every thing spake to the senses and the mind, through the medium of the happiest efforts of genius and of taste. Here her musical talents had so often exerted their syren influence, and received the plaudits of a delighted multitude. Here she had first received the duke de Beauvilliers as her guest; and her harp, whose tones she had taught to imitate the strain of her own awakened feelings, and speak to his heart the impassioned language of her own, still stood as it had then done in the centre of the room. Imogen involuntarily touched its chords; they returned a melancholy vibration. She recollected the evening when de Beauvilliers had drawn the instrument towards him, and produced a strain which thrilled on the chord of memory, and awakened all its finest vibrations. Imogen leaned over her harp, and hid her face in her veil. The past flashed on her mind, the present disappeared.

tf And this harp, lady,” said the usurer, touching the strings with his wand. They

ST. DOMINICK.

225

emitted a faint sound; Imogen started: Shall we put down this harp?’*

<f No/’ said Imogen, “ this I cannot part “ with. It is dear to me for a thousand <f reasons. It is the gift of a friend also.” It had been given her by the chevalier.— The moment when she had received it was present to her. She was reading by her father’s side in the little portico of the villa de Fiora when it arrived from Florence, and the chevalier placed it before her. The pleasure with which she pressed its chords, the delight which sparkled in the eyes of her parent and her friend, all arose to her memory. She was then innocent, happy, and proud in the consciousness of her well-tried virtue. What was she now ! The contrast was too humiliating to her feelings. She could not conceal her tears ; and, leaving her servants and the usurer to finish the inventory, she retired to her boudoir. “ De ‘ Sorville ! de Beauvilliers !” she passion-

VOL. IV.

L

226

•IHE NOVICE OF

atcly exclaimed, “ why are you not here “ to witness the expiation of all my errors !” In a short time the usurer rejoined her. He read over the inventory, of which, as he read, the steward took a copy. Then, promising to bring her the money at an early hour the following morning, he departed, leaving Imogen deeply impressed with the almost-fatherly interest he took in her concerns, the liberality of his sentiments, and the uncommon generosity with which he had behaved to her on a point where her ignorance of business might have left her wholly at his mercy.

ST. DOMINICK.

227

CHiLP. XXXVI.

- ------ Ah ! whither now are fled

Those dreams of greatness ; those unsolid hopes Of happiness; those longings after fame;

Those restless cares ; those busy bustling days ; Those gay-spent festive nights ; those veering thoughts Lost between good and ill ; that shar’d thy life't All now are vanish’d—Virtue sole survives,

Immortal never-failing friend of man,

His guide and happiness on high !

TnosisoN.

SOLITARY and alone, Imogen passed the rest of this eventful day, resigned to a train of reflection which no longer fluctuated between the goading recollection of her errors^ and the wish, unaccompanied by the means, of reparation. Fixed, resolved, she determined on paying off and discharging her servants the following morning, on assembling her creditors, and cancelling her debts ; and, having finally settled her affairs at Paris, to set off for

THE NOVICE OF

the chateau de St. Dorval, far from that world by which she had been betrayed and deserted, to pass the rest of her days in retirement, and, from the reflection of that happiness she bestowed on others, steal one beam to illuminate the gloomy hopeless aspect of her own destiny. “ My con-“ science appeased,” she mentally exclaimed, “ the wounds of my feelings cica-trized, if not healed; my principles re-(t stored to their dignity; my heart alone cf will remain unsatisfied—that heart on which alone I am, and ever have been, tc dependent for every hope of happiness.” Imogen dared not pursue this dangerous train of thought. The strength of the heroine was no shield against the tenderness of the woman ; and the soft instincts of nature triumphed, for a moment, over the powers of reason : her heart alternatély glowed with the pure and elevated sentiments of friendship and gratitude, or throbbed with the feverish pulse of ardent but disappointed love. De Sorville and

ST. DOMINICK.

229

de Beauvilliers alternately filled her imagination, until the tender recollection of the lover and the friend subsided in the sad and agonizing conviction, that both were lost to her for ever.

The next morning at an early hour the usurer waited on her. Imogen at his request produced the bills of the various articles he meant to purchase, and received, in spite of some delicate remonstrances, the full sum she had paid, or was to give, for them. On her collection of paintings, statues, &c. &c. she herself set the price paid for them in Italy ; and her menage was disposed of at a valuation, including her carriages, horses, &c. &c,

Imogen, in the course of the transaction, frequently expressed surprise, gratitude, and amazement, at a conduct so disinterestedly generous. The usurer replied: My dear young lady, I perceive you “ are apt to be led away by the ardor of “ your immediate feelings: over-reached by the world’s fraud, and still smarting

THE NOVICE OF

€i from its turpitude, you are amazed to “ meet with an honest man, and construe “ mere moderation into generosity ; but <f though by what I now pay you will not “ be a loser, trust me J must be a gainer ; for to injure my own interest merely to serve another would not be so much a Ci virtue as a folly.”

Before mid-day Imogen had finally concluded her business with the usurer, and received the amount of the purchases he had made, which were to be carried away in the dusk of the evening. Meantime a number of workmen were employed in despoiling the hotel de St. Dorval of those treasures she had with so much taste, so much trouble, and so much expence, enriched it with’

Imogen, as she looked again over the amount of her debts, and then counted the gold which the usurer had spread on the table, for the first time felt the value of money. Her first concern was now to pay off and discharge that numerous train of

ST. DOMINICK.

231

mercenary and insolent domestics, whose luxury, negligence, and extravagance, had so maturely tended to the derangement of her circumstances. Some of them, more polite than others, who looked forward to the revival of those golden days when they should again bask in the sunshine of luxurious indulgence, begged to be retained; and others, who had a real personal attachment to their imprudent but liberal mistress, entreated to serve her without any gratuity, rather than be discharged. But Imogen, with a heart too full to bear expostulation, requested to be spared the repetition of those firm resolves nothing could induce her to violate. Of the immense retinue, therefore, that once surrounded her, her establishment was now reduced to Beatrice, the two filles de chambres she brought from Italy, her page, one laquais, and an old family coachman.

The next day she assembled all her creditors. She beheld their number with amazement and remorse, received them

THE NOVICE OF

with fascinating* complaisance, alternately tinged with the humility of the debtor and the hauteur of wounded pride.

After the struggle of a moment, self-possessed, collected, and firm, she addressed them in an eloquent and affecting manner, gave a slight outline of that conduct by which they had been so much injured, and endeavoured to palliate its errors by pleading the inexperience of youth, and that sanguine confidence of character, which had tempted her to repose the conduct of her domestic affairs in the hands of mercenary strangers.

ff This attempt,” she added, u to exte^ f< nuate what cannot be excused, I owe to ff the world in general, and to you in par-ticular, who have been the principal suf-tr ferers by my imprudence and folly.”— Now the tears swelled to her eyes, and her awakened sensibility seemed to communicate a soft infection to her auditors.— Touched by her youth, her beauty, her eloquence, and her distress, many of them

ST. DOMINICK..

233

laid the money she had given them on the table, and begged still to be considered her creditors; while all refused the interest she so liberally offered. Imogen, however, had at last the pleasure of holding in her hands the receipts in full for every things she owed them ; and those people, whom the insolence of her domestics had so frequently stimulated to coercive measures, now retired invoking blessings on her head.

Her next and last consideration was to discharge her debts of honour. While she was looking over the memorandums she had made of them, the page brought her the following billets :—

BILLET I.

A pressing demand obliges mademoi-selle d’Entragues to trouble the lady de “ St. Dorval for the trifling sum lost to “ her by the countess at primero, on three <f several occasions.” l 2

334

THE NOVICE OF

BILLET II.

<c My dear Countess,

You have not a friend upon earth who laments your misfortune more than my-“ self; and were it not for that certain eti-*c quette which the world imposes, nothing “ could prevent me assuring you of my “ sympathy in person. If you can with “ any convenience let me have the trifle “ we played for, and you lost, at lans-“ quenette, you will infinitely oblige <f Your’s, sincerely,

“ Jacquelina de Beuil.”

BILLET III.

Dear Madam,

<c The other evening, at the hotel de “ Montmorency, the Goddess of Pleasure seduced me to a card-table : she staked her money—I my heart, and we both ef lost. She was paid in sterling coin j but “ of the four hundred crowns lost by her, “ one hundred still remains due to, dear (i madam, Your’s, most obsequiously. De Serving

ST. DOMINICK.

235

BILLET IV.

“ I have called twice at your door, and “ twice have been denied. You mistake, beautiful Imogen, the purport of my vi-“ sit: it is not the importunities of a cre-“ ditor, but the humble, the impassioned, ff solicitations of a lover, you evade. I “ came not, enchanting woman, to make a paltry pecuniary claim, but such only ff as love demands, and love alone can “ grant. You are still opulent in all that f‘ is most precious and desirable—youth, f‘ beauty,genius, and tenderness. In com-<f petition with these divine possessions, perish all the riches of the earth ! The “ sordid world is unworthy of you; op-pressed by the malice of your enemies, <f betrayed by the envy of those who called ‘f themselves your friends, abandoned by ff the too-easily sated de Beauvilliers. de-serted by the cold phlegmatic de Sor-“ ville, there yet lives a heart devoted to ‘f you with all its energies—there yet exists “ one who only waits your permission to

236

THE NOVICE OF

“ fling at your feet his fortune and his u fate.	“ De Sancy.”

ci Swiss- Guards Pavilion, Louvre. ”

The heart-wounding letters dropped one by one from the trembling hands of Imogen. The beautiful veil her fancy had flung over the world was now entirely withdrawn. The reluctance with which she had admitted those progressive proofs of its turpitude, which experience hourly forced on her, now no longer existed to smooth the asperity of her disappointed hopes. It was in vain she endeavoured to cling to the bosom of phiianthrophy ; the individual instances of vice, depravity, and ingratitude, she now witnessed, surrounded her as with a mist, and beyond this gloomy sphere her feelings did not suffer her to extend her view. The cold unkindness of mademoiselle d’Entragues, the base ingratitude of de Servin, struck her more than even the unfriendly negligence of mademoiselle de Beuil, or the equivo*

ST. DOMINICK.

237

cal and scarcely-understood insult of de Sancy.

Borne away with the impetuosity of her feelings, she was at first going to write to them all; but how touch the hearts of those who had given her such irrefragable proofs that they had disclaimed all feeling, all humanity? She, therefore, (when her emotion was somewhat subsided.) wrapped up the respective sums due to each in their own respective billets, and enclosing each in a blank sheet of paper, dispatched her page to the ladies d’Entragues and de Beuil, and Jaques to monsieur de Servin and the marquis tie Sancy.

And now, for the first time, her “ bo-

som’s lord sat lightly on his throne/’ Her debts all paid, her estate unincumbered, and a sum in her purse more than equal to the expences of her journey to Provence; prostrate on the earth, in the glowing effusions of a meek and grateful soul, she offered up her thanksgivings to that Being who had not turned from her ff the light of his countenance” when,

238

THE NOVICE OF

wandering in the dark mazes of error, she had implored his protection ; who, in endowing* her with those passions which sweeten and embitter life, which lead to bliss and verge to misery, had given her in a strong and good mind an infallible corrective and restraint.

The greater cause of her anxiety and distress being nowobviated, the injury she had done to others being repaired, she had leisure to examine into the source of that she had herself sustained. The neglect, the total desertion of all her female and many of her male friends, (for still a number of dissipated men of rank and fashion importuned her door, but importuned in vain,) she bad hitherto ascribed to the derangement of her affairs; thé festive ball,

O	*

the midnight revel, the fantastic masque, no longer lured them to her house, nor could she now expect a continuation of that society which only sought her for its own selfish gratification.

But, now that her mind, relieved from

ST. DOMINICK.

239

the pressure of poignant distress, had the power to plume the dropping wing of its keen but latent observation, she perceived a secondary cause had influenced the absence of those fluttering moths which had spread their gilded pinions around the beamy flame of her prosperous fortune, but fled with its extinction. The oblique hints of mademoiselle d’Entragues, relative to her adventure at Laon; the scandalous reports it had given rise to : the invidious comments made on her exhibition at the hotel de Montmorency; her afterwards being denied admittance there : the manner in which she had been received at the hotel de Belleisle; the presence of the lady Magdelaine, and the humiliating history of the poor Novice of St. Dominick, told (she doubted not) with many exaggerating circumstances which malice was ready to invent and prejudice to receive ; the assertion of the bishop de Rouenne, that he would persist in be-lieving her innocent/' implying that he

240

THE NOVICE OF

was singular in that belief; together with the libertinism that breathed in de Sancy’s billet, and his insinuation that she was deserted by the sated de Beauvilliers,” now forced the dreadful conviction on her mind, that she was less injured in fortune than in fame. Her pecuniary affairs she might, by the lesson of economy and prudence she had learned from her extravagance, yet retrieve ; but the chaste surface of her reputation once stained by the envenomed breath of slander ; the stability of her virtue once brought into question; and the purity of her character not only suspected but denied; this was a thought that harrowed up her soul ; this was an idea that wrung every nerve of her heart; this was a cause of suffering beyond all power of alleviation. The delicate hints of the chevalier, with respect to her connexion with de Sancy ; his frequent endeavours to repress that volatility of manner which sprung from the innocence of her hearty and the animated flow

ST. DOMINICK.

241

of her spirits; and, above all,, her last interview with the duke de Beauvilliers when he begged of her to hear him in mercy “ to herself,” rather than in kindness to him, now flashed on her mind in a new light. These were warnings of her impending danger, over which the delicacy of friendship shed a refined mystery, the conscious rectitude of her own principles, the careless security of her own guileless heart, rendered unfathomable.

Those eyes lately moistened with the gracious dew of self-approbation and returning peace now dropped tears of anguish ; and that bosom which lately heaved the sigh of grateful emotion, now throbbed with the convulsive sob of heartfelt anguish. Abandoned to this state of dreadful agitation, Beatrice found her mistress lying on a couch. The affectionate Provençal, since the derangement of her lady’s affairs had been made known to her, had never come into her presence but under the influence of the strongest emotion;

242

THE NOVICE OF

and, though unconscious of any new source of suffering which Imogen had to sustain, she now wept over her in silence, then endeavoured to offer some consolatory expressions of future hope and happiness, and, presentingherlady with a large packet, said, ‘r that it had been left by a ser-<c vant in a grand livery, and she did not cc doubt but that it contained some good “ news.” The idea of de Sorville, of de Beauvilliers, swelled to the heart of Imogen ; she called for lights, dismissed Beatrice, broke the seals, and read as follows :

“ To the Lady Countess de St. Dorval.

“ An unknown friend takes the liberty <c of presenting the enclosed to the lady “ de St. Dorval, in the anxious hope that “ the pleasing retrospection of her past " life will afford her the means of amu-“ sing away the solitude of her present " existence.”

Imogen, in the utmost amazement, took up the enclosure3 it was a small pamph-

ST. DOMINICK.

243

let, in the title-page of which she read, fC Biographical Sketch of the celebrated

“ Countess de St. D----1: with a striking

cc likeness of that Lady in the character <c of Pysche, as represented in the grand ft ballet performed at the hotel de Mont-

The likeness was indeed striking, but the dress and attitude were an indelicate and extravagant caricature.

Imogen paused for a moment for breath ; then, panting and agitated, she ran her eager eye over the few pages it contained. It was a scandalous but well-written libel, containing a series of malicious inventions, intermingled with such plausive and authenticated anecdotes, as to place the life of the innocent, but imprudent, Imogen in a new light even to herself ; while the invidious fabrications of envy and malice were so brilliantly pointed out by witty in-uendo, so apparently sanctioned by well-founded authority, so artfully arranged.

244	THE	NOVICE OF

and so humorously delineated, as inevitably to excite in the reader contempt for the subject of the work, and admiration for the talents of the ingenious author.

It represented Imogen as an eleemosynary member of the convent of St. Dominick, who had eloped during her noviceship with a young page, in the service of a female devotee of rank who visited the convent. That she afterwards engaged in an adventure, which led her to the camp of Laon in the disguise of a minstrel boy ; that her beauty attracted the notice of the

duke de B--------,then baron de M-------;

but that, disgusted with her gallantries, he had abandoned her, and she afterwards became the mistress of the old count de St.

D------1, That the well-known romance

of the count’s character induced him to educate his fair but illiterate mistress : for that purpose he carried her to the house of a philosophic friend near Florence, where her extraordinary genius, and the great advantages she enjoyed, soon made

ST. DOMINICK.

245

her mistress of all those brilliant accomplishments to which she had been lately indebted for her fashion and popularity. That she obtained such influence over the count, as to induce him to pass her for a daughter he had lost some years before on all the nobility of Florence and its neighbourhood. That on his death-bed he bequeathed her his whole fortune ; but that

the chevalier de S--------having succeeded

the count in her capricious affections,, she had forgone the splendor of affluence for the enjoyments of love, and had lived with her host in the utmost privacy for several months after the count’s decease. That her usual inconstancy again prevailed, and she left the shades of Tuscany for Paris ; that the chevalier accompanied her as her guardian and betrothed husband ; that her beauty, her talents, her riches, and the apparent propriety of her conduct, soon rendered her the object of fashionable idolatry; and that the king himself, either the victim of imposition, or bribed by her

246

THE NOVICE OF

smiles, had granted her letters patent of nobility, with the title of St. D——. But that her premature ruin, brought on by her boundless extravagance, and her former life being revealed by a coincidence of circumstances, and the unguarded impropriety of her conduct, had now torn away the veil of deception ; and that she now appeared to the view of the world as the most finished and artful adventuress ever registered in the annals of imposition.

The pamphlet fell from the hands of the horror-struck Imogen ; and when Beatrice entered the room a few minutes after, she found her lady stretched lifeless on the ground, and the blood flowing from her left temple, which in her fall had struck against the angle of the couch. The cries of the affrighted girl brought the few domestics the hotel contained to her assistance.

The unhappy Imogen was conveyed to bed, and a surgeon sent for to attend her. He found the wound neither deep nor dangerous ; but her; wild and wandering eye.

ST. DOMINICK.

247

almost bursting from its socket, her burning hands, her inflamed and scarlet cheek, and quickly-throbbing pulse, declared his senseless patient to be under the influence of a raging fever ; which, indeed, from the great agitation of mind and body she had lately endured, the irritability of her nerves, and the delicacy of her frame, had for some days been breeding in her veins.

In a vast and gloomy apartment, for they had carried her to the nearest, divested of the light and elegant furniture which had once dissipated its sombre appearance ; supplied with a few heavy and cumbrous articles drawn from the lumber-room, in which, three months back, they had been thrown ; stretched on a large and comfortless bed, whose heavy velvet hangings and ponderous canopy were impregnated with the mould and must of time ; oppressed by disease, deserted by the world, abandoned by her friends, surrounded only by a few mercenary domestics, lay the late gay, beautiful, and court-

24S

THE NOVICE OF

ed, countess de St. Dorval, in whose train the laughing Pleasures wildly frolicked, whose glance was courted by interest, whose smile was coveted by all b—a feverish hectic only glowing on that cheek where the blush of health and beauty so lately spread its crimson tints ; a look of pious resignation and meek uncomplaining woe streaming'from those languid eyes, from whose sparkling radiance the torch of bliss seemed once to have sought its brightness.

Without one endeared bosom to receive the pressure of her aching head ; without one caressing hand to alleviate the agony of her throbbing temples ; without one willing ear to receive the murmured plaint of drooping weakness ; without one tender eye to explain the silent asking glance of sickness and of pain,—for six days did the deserted Imogen languish through all the sad successive stages of a burning fever, uniting a full consciousness of her deplorable state to the most melancholy depres»

a

ST. DOMINICK.

249

sion of spirits and debility of mind. On the seventh her disorder had come to a crisis ; and on the eighth every hope of her immediate recovery was entertained.

Youth and a good constitution finally prevailed over the powers of sensibility and disease ; and at the close of a fortnight Imogen was able to leave her chill and solitary apartment, and remove to her own less comfortless boudoir and bedroom.

The surgeon who had been called in attended her through the course of her disorder with unwearied attention and successful skill. Until the last week he had been accompanied by a physician, on whose opinion he seemed to ground his own ; but from the day that Imogen had left her room they neither of them called. As soon as she was able to write, she sent a note to the house where the surgeon lodged, informing him that she meant to leave Paris for Provence as soon as she

VOL. IV.	M

THE NOVICE OF

was able to travel, and requested to see him in the interim.

The next morning she received the following billet from him :—

The countess de St. Dorval is reco-** vered, and I am overpaid. Before this Ce note will reach her hands, I shall be on my way to Normandy.

Jean de Muir.” cf Then there yet lives some humanity in the world,” exclaimed Imogen, dropping a tear on the note; ef and, deserted <f by all those who call themselves my friends, I owe the preservation of my <c life to the benevolence of a stranger.” The tide of health now began to visit once more the exhausted frame of Imogen ; her cheek again faintly glowed with its rich colouring, and her eye sparkled with its vital beam. She endeavoured to banish from her mind every thing that could rouse its dormant agonies; she thought not of the past, she spoke not of the present ; she made no enquiries; she seemed only anx-

ST. DOMINICK.

251

ious to commence a new era of existence.

Beatrice, unasked, informed her that no one had called during her illness except the old usurer, who, on the first night of her indisposition, had waited on her to know the intrinsic value of a picture he was going to dispose of ; but that, hearing of her illness, he had hurried away, “ as if,*’ said Beatrice, “ he thought there had been a plague in the house.”

Imogen sighed ; her heart was now almost invulnerable to disappointment, yet for a moment she felt its shaft inflict a wound; she had thought the usurer was not of the common order of beings.

In a few days she found herself able to travel ; every thing was prepared for her journey, and the morning of her departure arrived.

Clad in a simple white robe, wrapt in a large mantle, and covered by a long veil, leaning on the arm of Beatrice, the countess de St. Dorval passed through a range

252

THE NOVICE OF

of vast and desolate apartments, despoiled of their elegant drapery, their rich and splendid furniture; and, with a feeble step and downcast eyes, reached the great hall. Here she delivered the keys of her house into the hands of the tradesman's wife who had been sent to prison for the silk hangings he had furnished for the hotel de St. Dorval. The woman she made her housekeeper at Paris, with a suitable allowance, and a small sum of ready money in hand, which her poverty rendered acceptable. She then surveyed her traveling equipage ; it consisted of the cabriolet she had traveled up to Paris in with the chevalier, for her two women ; a small covered litter for herself, and two mules for the page and Jaques.

The morning was only in its dawn when she ascended her humble vehicle. As the carriages rolled through the court, Imogen cast one look on the heavy but magnificent pilé she was, she believed, for ever quitting. The emotions with which she had

ST. DOMINICK.

253

entered it flashed on her memory, those with which she was now leaving it struck on her heart; she sank back in her litter, and the heavy portals of the court closed after her with a loud crash.

They now entered the principal streets of Paris, and Imogen again insensibly raised her head and cast round her eyes. The lamps were not yet burnt out ; the patroles of the night were still on duty ; a few scattered groupes of masquers, returning from their nocturnal orgies, were stealing along to their respective homes. As she passed by the hotel de Guise, the porter was unbarring the gates of the outward court. She had often given him money in her frequent visits there; he looked into the litter as she passed, and caught her eye ; he bowed low, and a faint benediction met her ear—it was grateful— and this little circumstance affected her. As she drove by the hotel de Belleisle, she turned away her head ; the feelings the sight of it renewed were too painful to be encouraged.

254

THE NOVICE OF

They passed close by the palace of the Louvre. The window of the audience-chamber was open : at that very window she had been presented to Henry the lVth. by the duchess de Guise; at that window she stood when for the first time her brow was encircled with the diadem of peerage-—when she beheld the duke de Beauviiliers ! She gazed on this memento of her triumphs and her pleasures, till distance stole it from her view, and tears dimmed her eyes.

They had now passed by all the suburbs ; and as they advanced into scenes of rural peace and beauty, Imogen cast back one longing lingering glance, beheld the rising smoke, the lofty towçrs, and pointing spires, of Paris, appearing at intervals through the brakes and boles of the surrounding trees; and if one tear of youthful regret fell to the recollection of those festive gaieties, those brilliant pleasures, and splendid triumphs, she had once enjoyed, and now for ever relinquished, many

ST. DOMINICK.

255

drops of anguish stained her cheek at the goading recollection, that she who had entered Paris a few months back, rich in circumstances, spotless in fame, without one self-reproach rankling at her heart, supported by friendship, and proud in her own consciousness, was now leaving it with a fortune injured by her own imprudence, a character calumniated by that malice her own unguarded levity had sanctioned, and without one friend to support her in those sufferings of which she had been herself the author.

CHAP. XXXVII.

“ Desolate is the dwelling of Morna—Silence is in “ the house of her fathers.”

OSSJAN.

IMOGEN continued to prosecute her solitary journey with an extreme impatience to arrive at its conclusion, but without any interest except what awakened at

256

THE NOVICE OF

the recollection of those objects or scenes which she had passed by with the chevalier, whose just and tasteful remarks still seemed to vibrate on her ear as she contemplated them.

But how different,” said she, ef my present sensations from those I then ex-“ perienced ! Then life flushed upon me “ under a thousand alluring aspects ; no-cf velty shed its charm upon every object ; expectation pointed to scenes of Elysian beauty, and fancy peopled them with beings of celestial mould ;—then all was Ci pleasure unalloyed by doubt, and happb “ ness secured by self-approbation ! Such (g I then was. O God ! what am I now ! te Amiable de Sorville ! first and best of ft men, my last and dearest friend^ who “ still clung to my ill-fated destiny, until I drove thee from me by an imprudence you could not prevent, and dared not “ witness, why did I not listen to that (e warning voice of thine, when, like a “ guardian spirit, you hovered round your

ST. DOMINICK.

257

wayward charge! Why, oh! why did “ I not seize the honour of which I was €t so unworthy, fulfil the wishes of my <f sainted parent, and, in the peaceful “ shades of my ancestors, lead such a life c< as heaven itself approves and delights to t( behold !”

To this apostrophe succeeded a train of thought of a more tender, a more dangerous, nature. But Imogen resisted the sweet and soft solicitations of her heart, and forced her reflections from an object on which they still delighted with hopeless fondness to linger.

Early on the morning of her last day’s journey she sent her page forward to inform her steward of her arrival, to whom she had, previous to her leaving Paris, dispatched a courier.

Towards the decline of a fine spring-evening she beheld for the first time the rising turrets of the chateau de St. Dor-val; faintly defined on the deep red glow of the horizon, they rose above the dark m 2

2 58

THE NOVICE OF

woods which surrounded them. The sun was shedding its last beam on the massy clouds which floated in the atmosphere, and seemed portentous of a storm that already murmured along the summit of the highest trees.

All was wild and desolate; the deepening gloom of evening was only at intervals illumined by those transient corruscations which shed a livid light on every object, and rather rendered the darkness visible than dispelled it ; while the profound silence of the hour was only interrupted by the distant murmur of the mountain tor? rent, the faint vibration of a convent's deep-toned bell, and the fC shard borne " beetle’s” drowsy hum, as in his winding course he sung but ‘f night’s yawning

peal.”

The imagination of Imogen, still susceptible to every impression, was deeply touched by the gloom that surrounded her ; while, as her litter proceeded along an avenue of considerable length, cut through

ST. DOMINICK.

259

the forest of St. Dorval, her mind was absorbed in those awful and solemn sensations the solitude by which she was surrounded, and the contemplation of the ancient residence of her ancestors, visited for the first time under such peculiar circumstances, were calculated to inspire.

They at last reached the extremity of the avenue, which terminated in an expansive green platform ; a deep moat surrounded a high parapet wall, which enclosed a spacious court, whose portals opened at the foot of a draw-bridge ; in the midst of the court stood a vast and stately edifice, which, though wrapt in the shades of night, appeared to Imogen of considerable magnitude and extent.

When the fatigued and solitary traveler alighted from her litter, and entered the portals of her chateau, she was surrounded by a groupe of ancient domestics, who, though now almost past service, enjoyed a comfortable asylum and a small independence, secured to them by the bounty of

260

THE NOVICE OF

their late lord. One of them, who had been chief-butler for three generations, and now held the place of maitre-d’hotel, or house-steward, advanced at the head of the rest with a flambeau in his hand, which flashed upon the long grey hair that shaded his venerable face, and welcomed his lady in a speech of some length and sententious formality, perfectly in character with the stiff and antiquated appearance of the ancient orator ; while, as she smilingly replied with that winning condescension which ever fascinates the heart of humble inferiority,the whole venerable groupe advanced their white heads to catch her accents, shook their grey locks in token of approbation, and, with congratulatory tears of joyous emotion, followed her up the great hall.

This hall Imogen paused to contemplate. It yvas eminently spacious, paved with beautiful tesselated marble, and crowned with a vaulted roof of exquisite gothic workmanship, from whence hung.

ST. DOMINICK.

261

suspended by a massy chain a large and ponderous bronze lamp, whose blue light partially dispelled the gloom, and faintly discovered the immensity it was meant to enliven. The hall terminated in a grand stair-case, on the first step of which stood a figure, which presented to the eyes of Imogen a living model of a female of the last century.

“ This,” said Geoffry, the old steward, this good dame, so please rny lady, is <f our charge d’affaires at the chateau de “ St. Dorval, which place she has held “ thirty and two years come eve of St. “ Agnes, three hours past mid-day. ïs it “ not so, dame ?"

The dame bowed her head in token of assent to Geoffry, and endeavoured to bend her stiff joints into somethinglike a court-sey to Imogen, who, kindly taking her by the withered hand, said :

<f The long period of your services is the <<r best proof of your fidelity ; and while I shall make it my endeavour to reward

THE NOVICE OF

“ both, I shall be happy to profit by your “ experience and advice in the manage-“ ment of my household.”

The dame courtseying somewhat lower, a faint hectic glowed on her sallow cheek. The domestics exchanged looks of congratulation, and Geolfry in triumph led the way up stairs to the grand saloon.

Imogen, as she ascended, observed that they were of black marble with gilt balustrades on one side, and a wall on the other, covered with the martial trophies-of her ancestors, whose curious workmanship was incrusted with the damp and rust of time ; while above them waved the tattered banners of the family, agitated by the blast which at intervals crept through the whole edifice. The stairs terminated in a long gallery, hung with the pictures of the preux chevaliers and faded beauties of the house of St. Dorval.

At the extremity, GeofFry threw open a pair of massy folding doors, curiously carved with quaint devices, and ushered

ST. DOMINICK.

263

his lady into a spacious apartment, illumined at the further end by a wood fire, furnished with dark crimson velvet, and hung with rich but heavy tapestry. Geof-fry, placing a pair of tapers on a black marble slab, beneath a large mirror, dragged over a cumbrous fauteuil, then bowed to Imogen, and said:

Will not my lady countess take a seat “ at the mass, as she must be right weary “ after a journey of the Lord knows liovr “ many leagues? This wood is green ; 1 “ will go and fetch some dry chips from <f the old library.”

ff But first inform me,” said Imogen, who was leaning at a casement, “ to whom does that castle belong west of the fo-ff rest?”

What, lady, from behind which the " moon is now beginning to peep ? Why, “ his the chateau de Montargis *, and ‘f though only divided from us by a branch <f of the Durance, we have been from time immemorial at variance with its lord».”

THE NOVICE OF

Although the evening was cold, Imogen opened the sash of the casement, gazed, and sighed.

<f Aye, lady/’ continued Geoffry, shaking his head,ff it is all very true ; there it was your lady mother resided when my tf late lord the count carried her off from the baron de Montargis. The day on which he first saw her seems to be but ‘f as yesterday : here was I, in this very ‘c roorn^ arranging some books my young lord had been reading, when I received fc orders to launch the pleasure-boat, and “ endeavour to save that of the de Mon-<f targis’s. Marry, I believe, an my lord <f had not ordered it, the heretics should have sunk for me; not knowing that “ the mother of my lady countess was of the number, and fair she was to look <c upon, although she was wet and drip-“ ping, poor soul! as a mermaid. Lady, you are the living model of her. I think “ I see her at this moment, borne into this room in my lord’s arms. Certes, we

ST. DOMINICK.

265

(c marveled much when he visited the cha-teau de Montargis ; for till that moment Cf the foot of a St. Dorval had never crossed the threshold of a de Montargis for a “ century at least. Shortly after he car-ried her away from the chateau, and ff she never returned to it more/’

Imogen closed the casement—a chill shuddering crept through her frame.

It blows a nipping wind,” said Geof-fry, advancing the arm-chair, and closing the curtains.

Imogen, perceiving his solicitude, took possession of the chair, and endeavoured to detain him for a considerable time in conversation, which she at first attempted to turn on the state of the chateau and its environs ; but her thoughts involuntarily wandered from that of St. Dorval to the chateau de Montargis.

There were great doings there,” said Geoffry, fc on the marriage of the present “ duke ; you would have thought, lady, <f the Durance was all in a blaze with the

266

THE NOVICE OF

“ reflection of the illuminations and the " fire-works. But matters soon took ano-“ ther turn there; for they say the old “ lord grew ill because the king abjured rf his heresies, and turned catholic; and (( he and the young duchess died within a “ week of each other, but not before we (t had a right tilting match with the cow-“ ardly vassals of Montargis. You must r< know, lady, that one of the poltroons <f spoke with disrespect of our house, and “ called us a set of papists and traitors ;

upon which we all turned out to a man, <f and met them on their own ground.— “ To be sure the knaves had the advan-“ tage of us in youth and strength ; but 'f it would have gone hard with them, only the present young lord appeared before “ us, and threw himself between us, at r< the risk of his own life, and a fine te speech he made to convince us we were “ all of one religion, and all brothers and ie countrymen, and the like ; but it did “ not do. However, we gave over for

ST. DOMINICK.

26?

“that time. Mass, and I have often c< thought it were a pity this same young %t duke should be a Montargis, for he is a right valiant gentleman, and comely to “ look on withal. Besides, that now he “ has buried his lady, and that my lady <f countess, as ’tis said, has discarded mon-sieur le chevalier, whom I nursed a boy “ in these arms, and what with their es-<£ tates, touching each other, as one may tr say 5 and save, indeed, that the duke is a heretic, and has a different idea of “ things from what toe have, and that we “ never can forget old contentions, which renders the thing morally impossible.” Geoffry, who, struggling between his wishes and his prejudices, had argued himself in and out of an opinion in a breath, here paused abruptly; and Imogen, endeavouring to conceal the emotion his incoherent speech awakened, yet perfectly alive to its import, said, “ Geoffry, who** “ ever informed you that the chevalier de “ Sorville was discarded by me informed

268

THE NOVICE OF

€- you wrong ; it was his pleasure the alii-“ ance projected by my father should not take place/’

That is marvelous, passing marvel-ous,” said GeofFry ; “ refuse so fair and fc sweet a lady ! But then, monsieur le “ chevalier knew my lady was young f enough to be his daughter, and so, may-“ hap, he thought it a pity.”

Imogen here interrupted GeofFry to inquire if the duke de Beauvilliers was expected to visit his chateau soon, and blushed as she asked.

“ No, lady,” replied GeofFry; ‘'‘many “of the servants have lately been dis-“ charged, and ’tis said the duke will ei-“ ther live with his regiment or at court “ until he marries, which I trow will not “ be long.”

The servants now entered to prepare the table for supper ; the best of every thing the domains of St. Dorval afForded was spread before their youthful lady, who, surrounded by her grey-headed domestics,

ST. DOMINICK.

269

rewarded their solicitous attentions by appearing pleased and satisfied with every thing they did. After supper Beatrice and the old charge d'affaires attended her to the state bed-room, where everything was prepared for her reception, in gloomy and solitary grandeur; and Imogen, exhausted by fatigue of body and anxiety of mind, resigned herself to the restorative sweets of repose.

Refreshed by a night of undisturbed slumber, restored and invigorated by the pure and genial air she inhaled, Imogen arose at an early hour the following morning, throwing open the sash of her casement to catch the fragrance of the incense-breathing morn,” and to view the prospects the surrounding scenery afforded. The mist of twilight still rolled like vapoury billows on the plain, or ascended in graceful columns from the mountain’s rugged side: this was always to the picturesque fancy of Imogen an hour of peculiar interest. She watched the gradual

270

THE NOVICE OF

brightning of the day-light tints,, the lingering retreat of the morning star, the gradual appearance of innumerable objects, at first but imperfectly discovered, and the glorious rising of the sun as it spread a flood of living light on every side. With those emotions pf enthusiasm anj delight she was so eminently calculated to feel, she instinctively turned round to express the sublime and heartfelt sensations she experienced ; but the words died on her lips; for to whom could she address them ? And there can be no pleasure without participation/* she mentally exclaimed; this moment is the sure epi-tome of my future life. The blessings “ of sympathy are for ever denied me; and “ to live, neither understanding nor under-stood—alone, and isolated—to live— “ Oh, surely, to a heart like mine this is “ not to live!"

She turned despondingly from the casement; the prospect it afforded now awakened no pleasure, and she threw herself on a chair, and wept.

ST. DOMINICK.

271

To drive away those melancholy and hopeless reflections that intruded themselves on her mind, and gloomed her imagination, as soon as she had breakfasted she visited every part of the chateau, accompanied by the venerable Geoffry ; he led her through every apartment, gallery, and corridor, from the front to the rear, shedding an interest over their little tour by relating some incident connected with every spot. The rooms, spacious and kingly, were furnished with a splendor over which, though time had touched them with his decaying hand, an air of taste and magnificence still reigned. Imogen, having viewed the interior part of the building, proceeded to the lofty battlements and surrounding ramparts.

Here, lady,” said Jeoffry, leaning over a bastion on the fragment of a ruined tower, “here, from this spot, it is suppos-ed we have the finest view of the sur-rounding country that the chateau com-c; mands. Here you can trace the boon-

THE NOVICE OF

<f dary of your domain, as though it lay “ within the compass of your thimble: fc that snowy point which rises to the north “ is the mountain of Ventoux, in Dau-“ phiné; that spot, on which the sun shines “ so bright, is the vale of Comptât Venai-“ son : you may see too, just above it, the “ spires of Avignon ; aye, with the help “ of spectacles, I can discern the golden “ spire of St. Clair myself; and then to <c the east we have the high cliffs and wild te rocks of Vaucluse/*

“Vaucluse!” repeated Imogen, starting—“ Am I then so near Vaucluse?”

“ Aye, lady, within three hours ride of “ it, and go the longest way you will,” replied Geoffry, “ though it may be a hun-“ dred leagues off for me, with its gloomy “ woods, and noisy water-falls, and haunt-“ ed caverns.’1

An emotion of pleasure, arising from taste, feeling, and an association of remote ideas, now thrilled through the heart of Imogen. The loves, the sorrows, of Pe-

ST. DOMINICK.

273

trarch and Laura, rose on her recollection;, and to visit, to frequently visit, that spot sacred to their memories, became the favourite object of her future intentions.

About mid-day her agent arrived from Avignon. Imogen examined with the strictest attention into his books and accounts, applauded the regularity with which they had been kept, and informed him that she had now come to reside perhaps for the rest of her life at the chateau de St. Dorval, in the hope of promoting the happiness and comfort of her tenantry and vassals ; that any plan he could suggest to forward her wishes on that head, she would gratefully adopt, and put into immediate execution. Meantime she requested he would provide the chateau with every requisite for a liberal, but not an extravagant, establishment; and, having received the most unqualified assurances from the agent (who though a plain was a sensible man) of his intention

VOL. IV.	N

27*

THE NOVICE OF

to aid her in her laudable projects, she received from him a sum of ready money, and he departed.

CHAP. XXXVIII.

Care selve beate E voi folinghi e taciturni errori De reposo e de pacè.

------------Se le slelle

M’avesser dato in sorte,

De viver a me stesso e di far vita Conforme aile mil voglie lo gia co Campi Elisee :

Fortunate Giardini de Semedie La vastra ombra gentil non cangeree.

Pastor Fido.

THE news of the arrival of the countess de St. Dorval at the residence of her ancestors was no sooner circulated through the neighbourhood than her tenantry and yassals came in crowds to the chateau to pay their homage to its lady, by whom they were received with a kindness that

ST. DOMINICK.

275

bordered on affection, and entertained with the plenteous hospitality of feudal times. These congratulions were gratefully received. Their complaints were listened to, their grievances redressed, and favours voluntarily awarded them which they had not the courage to demand.

While Imogen endeavoured to form a new code of laws, and become the legislator of her little dominion, encouraging industry, rewarding merit, promoting private felicity and public good, her own domestic system underwent a thorough reform. Methodical without formality, hospitable without extravagance, and economical [without parsimony, nothing was wasted, and taste and prudence, elegance and liberality, still went hand in hand.

Still considering herself in a state of probation, until she had expiated her errors by evincing the lesson of wisdom and experience she had derived from them, the frugality of her own immediate table, and the extreme simplicity of her dress, were

276

THE NOVICE OF

now commensurate to their former profusion, luxury, and extravagance ; indulging her fancy by resuming the interesting and simple habit of the Novice of the order of St. Dominick, with the exception of its religious attributes; and wandering during the delightful season of all-reviving spring through the shades of her paternal abode, and led by the hand of charity, she visited the humble dwellings of her vassals and tenantry, attending the -sick, comforting the unhappy, relieving the distressed, conciliating the inimical, and, with all the gay propensities of her still cheerful disposition, promoting the rural festivity and participating in the artless joys of her grateful, her almost adoring, dependants.

The old compared her to all the former ladies of St. Dorval, whose lives tradition had registered, or memory preserved, and confessed she gained by the comparison. The young did not compare her to any thing, because they believed she was be-

ST. DOMINICK.

277

yond all parallel. All looked upon her as the guardian genius of the soil, and in every heart was erected a shrine to the tutelar idol of its gratitude and its love.

The felicity which Imogen bestowed around her now began, in some degree, to shed a faint irradiation on herself: and the peace,, the solitude, the innocence, of her life, soothed the irritation of her harassed spirits, and produced a mild and gradual declension from agitation, anxiety, and remorse, to peace, repose, and selfapprobation.

But to a heart to which the existence of powerful emotions was so requisite, to a soul capable of the most sublime, the most exquisite feelings, alive to every species of tenderness, of bliss, “ a cool sus-

pense from pleasure and from pain” was but little consonant: created either to suffer or enjoy, and both in the extreme; a state of inanity, of apathy, was of all others, to the sentient and animated Imogen, the least supportable. Surrounded

278

THE NOTICE OF

by those whom the want of education rendered an inferior species of being to herself, and consequently debarred of all social and refined intercourse, she felt herself alone and isolated in the midst of the creation. Not daring to give wing to hope, from experienced disappointment; trembling to unfold the volume of memory, where, among a crowd of recorded ills, many a poignant bliss, traced in imperishable characters, would oppose their sweet recollection to the cold and joyless apathy of her present existence; forward she must not, and backward she dared not look. She had now passed two months at the chateau, when one morning, as she endeavoured to amuse herself by looking over the books in the library, an odd volume of Petrarch fell in her way ; and her conversation on the subject of that author with the duke de Beauvilliers, at the camp of Laon, and her present proximity to Vaucluse, rushed on her memory. Hitherto the duties she had imposed on her-

ST. DOMINICK.

279

self had occupied her mind; but memory 5 feeling-, and taste, now awakened to their former influence, as she perused those plaintive and beautiful sonnets, which were now so consonant to her mind’s pensive tone, which recalled the sweet emotion she had felt when first she heard them repeated by the man she loved—the sober and home-felt satisfaction she had experienced, in learning to peruse them herself from the mind she esteemed. Warm with the sacred fire of poetical enthusiasm, touched with the affliction of genius, and the woes of hopeless love, Imogen, in a garden-chair, driven by herself, and followed by Geoffry on a mule, (who looked contemporary with his rider,) set off on her little pilgrimage to Vaucluse, which lay about three leagues from St. Dorval. Having left the spires of Avignon to the left, she proceeded to the valley of Vaucluse, winding along the banks of the river Sorgue, which, stealing its source from the fountain of Vaucluse,

280

THE NOVICE OF

meanders through a series of rich and verdant meadows, enamelled with the various and beautiful tints of those flowery plants which skirt its shores, and bathe their glowing heads in its wave.

At the entrance of the delicious vale, Imogen alighted, and gave her little carriage in care to GeofFry, whose aged limbs were but little calculated to follow the elastic step of his youthful lady through the wild wanderings of her tasteful rambles. Impressed, however, with some degree of affectionate anxiety with respect to her safety, and of superstitious awe concerning the sombre shades she was about to visit, he earnestly besought her to accept of the company of the ghide w ho lived at the cottage; but Imogen wanted no other guide than the volume of Petrarch she held in her hand, and no other companion than her own feelings; and, thankfully declining the suggestion of her servant, impressed with the most interesting sensations she entered alone that enchant-

ST. DOMINICK.

281

ing vale, where nature delights to appear under a variety of aspects equally beautiful and sublime, romantic and awful. The sensations of Imogen still changing with the character of those objects which awakened them, she proceeded with delight along the valley’s flowery course, until, gradually losing its smiling expansion, it narrowed to a gloomy dell, and the verdant green of its enamelled meadows gave place to the sombre drapery of the dark and creeping shrubs which slung their murky wreaths amidst the gloomy foliage of the yew, or stole around the branches of the lofty pine. Awed, yet charmed, the gaze of the solitary wanderer wras now arrested by that enormous mass of bold and perpendicular rocks which form a natural barrier to the valley, from whose dark recesses flow those innumerable streams which supply the celebrated fountain of Vaucluse. Imogen hung in profound emotion over its expansive and unruffled bosom, darkened with the deep n 2

THE NOVICE OF

shade of the impending cliffs; then, following its course as it stole away by a narrow pass, with the most awful impressions she beheld its collected force rushing down a headlong steep in aloud cascade, whose thundering noise, echoed by the surrounding cavities, struck horror on the ear, while its divided streams foamed among detached pieces of rocks, whose grotesque forms rising among the «parking waves, and covered with aqueous plants, glittering with the feathery spray, amused the eye and interested the fancy of the enthusiast beholder.

As Imogen proceeded she caught an imperfect view of a ruined castle, which hung on the butting point of a distant cliff, and gave the last fine touch of interest to a scene which checked even the flights of imagination, by including within its magic circle the finest features of the romantic and the picturesque, the beautiful and the sublime.

From the description so accurately given

ST. DOMINICK.

283

of it by Petrarch, Imogen justly supposed this ruin to be all that remained of the castle belongingto the ancient lords of Avignon, and once the residence of Petrarch's amiable friend, the good and gentle bishop of Cavillon.

Constantly recurring to the volume of Petrarch she held in her hand, every passage she perused shed a profound and tender interest on every object that met her glance.

“ And yet," said she, “notwithstanding “ the coolness of this fountain, the soft “ gloom of these shades, the peaceful se-“ renity of this scene, so calculated to

temper the ardor of an impassioned “ heart, and soothe the perturbation of a “ wounded mind, it was probably here, on “ this spot, beneath the shelter of these “ overhanging and awful cliffs, that the “ enamoured and unhappy Petrarch ex-“ claimed—f I may hide myself among “ these rocks, these woods, but, alas ! there “ is no place so wild, so solitary, where

284

THE NOVICE OF

“ the torments of love do not pursue me!’ ” Imogen read this passage aloud, and concluded it with a deep and convulsive sigh that arose not solely from the compassion of Petrarch’s woes. •

A sigh still louder than her own declared the sympathy of some invisible auditor : shuddering with apprehension, she cast round a quick and timid glance—all was solitary and silent. Imogen endeavoured to recover herself—“ It was but the vibration of the rocks/* said she; “ those ec rocks which have so often echoed to the “ sighs of hopeless passion.” Yet, impressed with a shade of lingering fear, she turned away from the place, and positively wandered on, in search of a spot appropriate to the cottage of Petrarch, which he had described as lying between the river and the valley. Fancy soon supplied a site, but of that picturesque hut, whose rural simplicity he had likened to the dwelling of Fabricius, not a wreck remained to ascertain the identity of its situation.

ST. DOMINICK.

285

Seating1 herself on a moss-covered bank, which rose on the flowery shores of that clear stream that meandered from the fountain of Vaucluse, and which she felt had still the property ascribed to it by Petrarch, “ of giving wings to the irnagina-tion,” her glowing fancy gave “ To airy nothing1 a local habitation and a name,” and assembled before her mind’s eye” the interesting group which formed the simple establishment of the poetical and love-lorn recluse.

The old woman, in whose face he used to say all Lybia and Ethiopia were pictured; his ancient fisherman, to whom he had given the epithet of an aquatic animal ; and his faithful dog, whose good qualities he thought it not beneath his genius to record ; she thought she beheld surrounding their master on the opposite shores, while he shared among them his simple fare of nuts and brown bread, on a spot where he declared a voluptuary, who was in search of the greatest delicacies, might be profusely accommodated.

286

THE NOVICE OF

While a new interest every moment awakened in the bosom of Imogen, and she felt herself refreshed by the temporary repose she had taken, she arose to conclude her sentimental pilgrimage by visiting the celebrated cavern of Vaucluse, led towards it by the description of its immortal inhabitant. The sober light of fast-coming evening was stealing its pensive veil over the drooping beauties of nature, and displacing the broad glare of meridian splendor; soft dews fell on every side, and frequent blasts swept along the stilly air, and murmured amidst the foliage of the trees. The reflective melancholy that swelled in the bosom of Imogen (who thought amidst these awful solitudes of the inconsequence of those illusive trifles that in the world’s busy haunts engaged and distracted her mind) was finely in unison with the pensive tone of her situation ; and she approached the entrance of the cavern of Vaucluse full of the most solemn and awful emotions.

ST. DOMINICK.

287

This cavern, which seemed hollowed by the hand of Nature, as the last asylum of Despair, even in the cheerful glare of day was not to be visited without emotions of profound awe ; and Imogen, alone and in the gloom of evening,, shuddered as she crossed its threshold, then retreated, and, blushing at her fanciful weakness, again advanced, led on by interest, by curiosity, and by sentiment. At first all was impenetrable obscurity, till her eye, accustomed to its darkness, obtained the power to observe its singular and natural construction. The spars and petrifactions which hung from its grotesque roof glittered on the gloom as a slanting ray of light darted through a crevice, and partly illumined their beautiful forms; while huge masses of mis-shapen rock projected from its rough-hewn sides, covered with the moss of ages, to which the fancy of Imogen almost attached form and character. As she proceeded with cautious steps and increasing emotion through the deepening cavity

288

THE NOVICE OP

far as the eye could pierce the gloom, her awakened imagination gave to what she believed to be a rock the exact contours of a human figure, leaning in a recumbent attitude, and veiled in an adhesive drapery.

While this extraordinary appearance amused her fancy, it insensibly communicated a dread to her mind. Fascinated as if by a spell, she gazed until she almost thought the sombre genius of the cavern appeared before her, animating into life and rising into motion ; when the wild blast, howling through the cave, lightly agitated the drapery she had believed to have been of rocky firmness, and the figure, with a scarcely perceptible motion, changed its attitude. With a shriek of horror, and the velocity of a bird, Imogen fled while her trembling limbs were able to support her; then, panting and breathless, sank at the foot of a tree at no great distance from the entrance to the valley. When something recovered, though

ST. DOMINICK.

289

still struggling with the impressions of horror, she perceived Geoffry and the guide advancing towards her, and arose to meet them.

“ The Virgin and Joseph be praised !” exclaimed Geoffry, that we see my lady ff countess coming safe and well out of this place ; for in good sooth, lady, when “ I heard the convent bell of St. Clair toll Cf for vespers, and saw the shadow of yon-“ der mountain stretching across the plain, <c my heart misgave me hugely; never “ dreaming that you could take any plea-ff sure in rambling about so lonely a place, “ with such fine parterres and terraces of your own at the chateau.”

For my part,” said the guide, as they followed Imogen, who hurried on with a quick pace, “ though I have been living ff at the entrance of the valley since I was “ a boy, I would not walk here alone at ff this hour to be made an abbot and a <e pope to boot; for they say the signor “ Petrarch and the lady Laura meet about

THE NOVICE OP

“ this hour in the cavern every evening, and sing piteous love ditties till the morn-ing dawns.”

Imogen shuddered. There are moments when the strongest efforts of reason are insufficient to destroy the influence of imagination under the power of early superstitious prejudices. The strong mind of Imogen had in its first progression to truth and reason destroyed that power, but the images of supernatural horror received on her fancy among the bigoted sisterhood of St. Dominick were not yet totally faded, and she now trembled at what she did not believe; but by one of those efforts of mind by which she always gave her back her-self,| she saw the folly of her childish apprehensions; and, supposing it was some solitary wanderer like herself whom she had seen, and who had endeavoured to shun her observation by plunging into the cavern, she in a careless manner asked the guide if she had been the only visitor to Vaucluse that day.

ST. DOMINICK,

29]

The only one, lady,” said the guide, Cc except, mayhap, the pilgrim who passed “ our cottage before you drove up to it; ct he might have made it his way towards “ Avignon. My dame offered him alms “ as he passed her to pray for the departed cC soul of her youngest boy, but he an-‘c swered nought, and walked on as though “ he did not hear her; upon which my “ dame thinks he was bound to a vow of “ silence, and was going to the shrine of “ Loretto to do penance for some mortal u sin. Mass ! she said as how he looked “ hugely like a murderer, though certes “ she saw nothing of his face, by reason “ of his hat (in which was fastened a large “ scallop) being flapped in his eyes.”

The mystery was now solved. This pilgrim must have been the visitant of the cavern, and Imogen's fears, though they changed their character, still existed ; for her proximity to a murderer was a more substantial cause of terror than even her silent communion with a being of the other world.

THE NOVICE OF

They now reached the cottage door, where Imogen’s vehicle stood ready for her reception; and, having presented the guide with a piece of money, she drove away, experiencing a mingled thrill of pleasure and of pain from having visited a spot so celebrated in the annals of poetry, and which nature herself seemed to have designed for the retreat of a wounded and sensible heart, the indulgence of hopeless passion, and an asylum for cureless sorrow or wild despair.

CHAP. XXXEX.

Like bright metals on a sullen ground,

My reformation, glittering o’er my faults,

Shall shew more goodly, and attract more eyes. Than that which hath no foil to set it off.

Shakespeare.—Henry IV-

THE days of Imogen continued to flow mildly on, like.the peaceful course of an uninterrupted stream. Gazing, “through

ST. DOMINICK.

293

“ the dark postern of time elasped/’on the tumultuous agitations of her past life, she acquired from the view a just, comparative estimate of the halcyon tranquillity of her present situation ; and, in a placid acquiescence to rational contentment, she endeavoured to lull those thrilling recollections which sometimes told her she knew that she was happier than she felt.

While she continued to improve her heart by the practice of every virtue, and to enlarge the scale of her ideas by every liberal pursuit, her mind still ascended in progressive excellence towards that perfection it was created to attain, and looked down on its former frivolous engagements and illusive errors with mingled e-motions of remorse and contempt; as the vapour which, rising from among the mists of the earth, sports for a moment on the bosom of the sun-tinged cloud, till, borne aloft by its own specific lightness, it at last reaches that pure point of rare-fication where, firm and condensed, it

294

THE NOVICE OF

rolls majestically above the nether atmosphere, on whose surface it before but idly floated.

About a week from the period of her sentimental journey to Vaucluse, as Imogen was indulging in one of those solitary rambles along the picturesque shores of the Durance, which gave to ber view the two-fold interesting prospects of the chateaux de St. Dorval and de Montargis, and waked the pensive pleasures of her heart and imagination, she was accosted by one of her own vassals, whose wife, a worthy and industrious young woman, the comfort of an aged father, and the attentive mother of an infant progeny, was lying in the last stage of a decline.— Imogen’s first inquiry was for the invalid, whom she had visited since her confinement, and whose life she had protracted, though she could not save, by her attentions.

“ Alas ! good my lady,” replied Justin, “ it is all, I fear, nearly over with my

ST. DOMINICK.

295

“ poor Claudine ; and so I came to make “ bold to request that my lady’s goodness “ would grant the last request of my poor “ dying wife.”

“ If it lie within my power/’ returned Imogen, “ you need not have a doubt of “ my inclination, Justin/’

“ Heaven shower its blessings on your “head, lady!” said Justin, brushing a tear from his sun-burnt cheek ; “for sure-st ly you were sent as an angel of good-“ ness among us. The request then, lady, “ is, that you would visit our poor Claudine “ this evening, for we fear she will not “pass the night; and while she weeps “ over her father and children, she still “ cries that she should die in peace, could “ she recommend them to the care and “ protection of our lady countess.”

“ Say no more, Justin,” interrupted Imogen eagerly. “ You do me injustice “ by supposing I should have a moment’s ct hesitation to comply with your request.” She then ordered the page who attended

THE NOTICE OF

her to fly to the chateau for some cordials and restoratives, and accompanied Justin down the forest pathway which led to his cottage. The last beam of the setting* sun lit up its casements as she reached its door. She found the invalid stretched on a mattress, pale, faint, and almost breathless ; her head supported on the bosom of her aged father, who wiped away the tears that fell from his eyes on her cold white cheek with his long grey hair; her right arm was entwined round the neck of a little girl, who seemed to weep rather from sympathy than from a consciousness of her loss ; while her left was held out to a person in the habit of a pilgrim, who appeared anxious to catch a flope from the pulse he sought, but that now faintly fluttered with the throb of life. Another in (he same habit, but of loftier stature, sat in the shade of the little room with a cherub boy on his knee, while its infant brother sported at his feet, and played with his staff.

Imogen, though struck by the unexpect-

ST. DOMINICK.

297

ed appearance of the singular-looking strangers, as the cavern of Vaucluse flashed across her recollection, was yet too much affected by the melancholy scene she witnessed to give any play to idle curiosity. As she advanced towards the invalid, the pilgrim modestly withdrew; and Imogen took his place by the bed, and took the hand he held in hers ; while, in the softest accents of tenderness and humanity, she addressed the patient. The countenance of the dying woman as it turned towards Imogen brightened with a momentary gleam, a faint hectic flushed her cheek, and her dim and beamless eye was suddenly lit up with the lambent flame of hope and satisfaction. She pressed the hand of Imogen, and endeavoured to speak, but articulation was fled; and her eyes, as they wandered from her aged parent to her infant offspring, and then, swimming in tears, were raised to the face of Imogen, alone spoke the feelings and wishes of her soul.

VOL. IV.

O

298

THE NOVICE OF

“ Let thy heart rest in peace/’ said Imogen, in tender emotion ; thy father ct shall be my father, and thy children my children.”	‘

The invalid raised herself on the bosom of her parent ; a deeper blush glowed on her cheek, a smile of seraphic expression played on her countenance; she clasped the hands of Imogen in hers, cast round a glance that seemed to include within its view all that was dear to her on earth ; then, fixing her eyes on her father, she closed them for ever.

Imogen arose. She wept, nor did she conceal her tears ; for the tear of sympathy to the feelings of the afflicted is gracious as the dew of heaven to the decayed and withering plant. But she respected the sacred sorrows of the husband and the father ; and she retired in silence, leading away in either hand a child of the deceased. Her laquais and page were in waiting at the threshold of the door, which as she passed the pilgrims bowed to her

ST. DOMINICK.

299

with almost lowly reverence. Imogen courteously returned their salute ; and, having ordered the page to leave behind the wines and cordials he had brought to the cottage, returned with her two innocent companions to the chateau de St. Dorval, each borne in the arms of her domestics. As soon as she reached home, she gave her adopted children in care to the old charge-d'affaires and Beatrice ; then, throwing herself on a couch in the large Gothic saloon, where she sat, and which was then partially illumined with the beams of a rising moon, she resigned herself to that train of sublime and awful reflection the solemn and affecting scene she had lately witnessed was calculated to inspire. Thought soared beyond the boundaries of mortal life, and hope pointed its flight to the regions of eternity.— While Imogen still continued wrapt in the sublimity of divine reflection, Geoffry entered the room ; and, having drawn close the heavy window-curtains, and placed

300

THE NOVICE OF

lights on her reading-table, he informed her that the two pilgrims whom she had lately seen at Justin’s, one of whom had been for some days attending Claudine, were then in the great hall below, and had entreated him to bear their humble supplication to his lady that she would graciously condescend to grant them a few minutes’ audience. (C Upon which,” added Geoffry, “ I flatly said them nay, seeing the unseasonableness of the hour. f< Albeit, I do believe them, lady, to be Cf right reverend pilgrims; fora power of cf good has one of them done, who seems “ to be the elder of the two, during the u week or so they have been loitering f£ about the neighbourhood, as touching the performance of divers cures and the 6t like ; yet, marry, no one is a whit the i: wiser where they dwell, nor how they live, for nor food nor lodging take they from “ those who olfer ; nor do they even shew “ their heads from under those same great cowls of theirs, which makes us all to

ST. DOMINICK.

301

“ think ’tis not for nothing they do such t( woeful penance.”

And wait they still, Geoffry ?” demanded Imogen in surprise.

<f Aye, marry, do they, lady.” fç Then I will see them,” said Imogen ; tf they may want my assistance themselves, ff 01% on the privilege of their holy charac-cf ters, they may come to solicit it in behalf of others ; perhaps ’tis from Justin they come. Shew them up then, good Geof-“ fry, and wait thyself in the anti-cham-" ber.”

Geoffry retired, muttering a blessing on her head, and in a few minutes returned, ushered in the strangers, and then left the room.

The dim light which a pair of wax tapers shed through the vast and gloomy a-partment gave a shadowy and spectral appearance to the tall figures which now presented themselves to the eye of Imogen ; and an indescribable emotion of terror would have prompted her to have re-

THE NOVICE OF

called her servant, but that the conscious puerility of her fears deterred her. She returned, therefore, the humble salute of the strangers with her usual courtesy, and enquired into the nature of their demands with that sweetness of voice and countenance which always accompanied the hope of performing a benevolent action.

One of them, replied : <f Lady, we are tc penitent sinners on a pilgrimage to the shrine of our tutelar saint for crimes

(e which----”

“ Crimes !” involuntarily repeated Imogen, shuddering.

Crimes,” said the pilgrim meekly, which we hope are not beyond redemp-Ci tion, and which we trust our arduous pilgrimage will expiate.”

To suppose it,” said Imogen, with the air and voice of an admonishing angel, were to ascribe to the Deity the weakest te of human frailties, and to present to man “ the most dangerous of human examples; “ for, is the justice of heaven to be bribed

ST. DOMINICK.

303

ft by a trivial penance, foreign to the er-“ ror you would retribute ? and is vice to “ be discouraged by presenting so easy a “ mode of expiation for every crime ? Oh ! " if you would indeed evince the contrition <f of your soul, repair the fault by which <f it has been awakened : if thou hast de-ct frauded, restore that thou hast unlaw-“ fully taken ; if thou hast slandered, clear “ the fame thou hast wantonly stained.— “ Whatever has been the nature of thy crime, let thy expiation be proportioned “ to its extent and thy ability; then turn “ to thine own heart, it will absolve thee ;

then appeal for mercy to thy God, and “ he will hear thee.”

The pilgrims bowed lowly, let fall their staves within their arms, and turned round as if to depart.

ft Yet stay,” said Imogen mildly, and with a faint smile; “ to give mere advice “ where benefits of a more solid nature “ are probably expected, is the hacknied t( trick of those who bestow what is always

304

THE NOVICE OF

ct so easy to spare. J, however, do not (i mean to add refusal to reproof. Speak !

in what manner can I serve you V* and she took out her purse.

The pilgrims approached a few steps. Imogen arose, and advancing towards them said : “ I must however confess I should much rather assist you to repair your ff fault than to perform that pilgrimage by “ which you hope for its expiation.”

“ Our pilgrimage is already made/’re-turned the pilgrim. That it is an ex-“piatory one remains for thee, sweet saint, “ to determine.”

The cowls of the prostrate strangers fell back on their shoulders, and Imogen beheld at her feet the duke de Beâuvilliers and the chevalier de Sorville. Pale and lifeless, she fell in their extended arms. When she recovered, she found herself seated on a couch, her head supported on the bosom of de Sorville, the venerable Geolfry holding a glass of water to her lips, that trembled in his grasp, and the duke de Beâuvilliers

ST, DOMINICK.

305

kneeling at her feet,, with one of her hands clasped in his. To the bewildered imagination of Imogen all was for a moment like the “ baseless f f fabric of a vision and even the group which surrounded her appeared but as the phantoms of her own disordered imagination. It was the well* known voice of de Sorville that first brought home the sweet conviction to her senses, that this soul-reviving spectacle was not the mere glowing dream of fancy, but the sweet accomplishment of all her heart’s dearest wishes.

(C Canst thou,” said de Sorville, “ O Imogen, forgive your friends thus selfishly ff purchasing the gratification of their own fC feelings at the expence of thine? Canst c‘ thou forgive this abrupt intrusion, and tf the imposition which preceded it?” ff Can I ?” faintly exclaimed Imogen, while a blush mantled on her cheek, and her timid glances, bathed in tears, were fixed on the earth :	Can	I	?	oh	!	I	am	not

o2

306

THE NOVICE OF

€t worthy, I am not”—and the words died on her faltering lips.

“ Thou art worthy of the most exalted “ esteem, the most ardent love/' said de Sorville ; and with an air of paternal tenderness he folded her to his bosom. The duke de Beauvilliers dropt her hand, started from her feet, and walked to the other end of the room: while Geolfry, recovering from his amazement the metamorphosis he had witnessed excited, begged to be indulged in a hearty laugh that shook bis sides, and rubbing his hands together joyfully exclaimed, “ Mass! an this be not the most curious device and the best “ played withal, that ever my old eyes Cf witnessed. Holy rood ! who would ever have suspected monsieur le chevalier for <f such a piece of waggery, for, when thou “ wert a younker, monsieur, (under sub-mission be it spoken) thou wert but lit-cc tie given to mirth or merriment; save “ once indeed, which well I do remem-" ber me; 'twas when, with my late lord

ST. DOMINICK.

307

ff the count, thou didst return from col-“ lege, a right pleasant device didst thou enact. The story runs thus/'

“ But the story a-t present runs thus, my <e good Geoffry,” interrupted the chevalier gaily. We have been wandering tc about your forestall day under a vow of “ abstinence, you know; but, as our pe-. “ nance is now over, and your air is keen, “ we wish to try the strength of your “ forces in the buttery and the larder; so, monsieur Geoffry, sound the trumpet of ff alarm in your banqueting-room as soon as you please, and you will find us ready for the attack; and as for your anecdote of my solitary frolic, we will reserve that “ as a bon bouche for a future moment.’*

" Right, monsieur, right,” returned Geoffry; Cf and I will convince your wor-“ ship in a trice, that neither our woods " nor our ponds are deserted since you and “ my late lord, the count, used to sally “ forth, at the morning dawn, with your “ nets and your guns. And as for our

308

THE NOVICE OF

wines, 1 challenge all the chateaux on “ both sides of the Durance to shew such a cellar/' Here Geoffry looked round to the duke de Beauvilliers, and; bowing low, he added: “ and with my lady’s good “ will, there is not a living soul in the “ chateau to-nightbut shall try its strength “ in drinking prosperity to the noble houses “ of St. Dorvaland Montargis.”

“ Well said, Geoffry," returned de Sor-ville; <c and your lady, the duke, and my-self, will pledge you with all our souls.” “ I warrant you, monsieur,” said Geoffry, rubbing his hands : “ the saints be “ thanked, say I, for this blessed night, for “ this is a sight my aged eyes did never hope to open on;” and he bowed low to the duke, adding: “ and now, with my lady’s good pleasure. I’ll go down to the “ hall, and make known this joyful event “ to my fellow-servants." Imogen faintly smiled assent, and, having in some degree recovered her presence of mind during the interval the loquacity of Geoffry afforded

ST. DOMINICK.

309

her, as soon as he had retired she arose, and, with an air of dignity and grace, welcomed her illustrious guests to the chateau de St. Dorval ; who, invited by her expressive but timid glance, took each a seat on either side of their fair hostess. The pause, which for a few minutes ensued, was delicate and distressing. The ardent gaze of her guests were riveted on the blushing face of Imogen, who again, though in a confused manner, expressed the happiness this unexpected visit conferred on her, while, as she stole a glance at the duke, the vision of Vaucluse rushed to her recollection.

tf Take care,” said the chevalier, smiling; “ you know not the danger which u may lurk in this cordial welcome. For “ my part it is scarcely necessary to say “ more to render me your guest for life;

and for the duke, I doubt not but he will “ plead his military privilege, and make the chateau de St. Dorval his head quar-“ ters while he remains in Provence.”

31 0

THE NOVICE OP

“ Inclination would, doubtless, lead me u to endow myself with such a precious (C immunity,” said the duke, coldly ; “ but ,c as I shall leave Provence immediately, “ 1 shall proceed this night to the chateau “ de Montargis/'

ec What! my lord,” said the chevalier gaily, “ after having made our pilgrimage “ together, will you desert your brother et votarist at the shrine of our mutual de-“votion? Behold the propitious smile “ that lurks on the lip of our fair saint. t( Can you resist its influence ?”

There are such things as pious frauds/* said the duke with a forced smile, and rising from his seat.

<c Yet happily, ’tis not holy cheats you « fear, my lord, but temporal dangers. “ Come, confess you cherish an hereditary “ suspicion of your hereditary enemy.— “ But what have you to fear from treach-“ ery while thus I preserve an armed neu-Ét trality between you ?” and the chevalier rising took the hand of de Beauvilliers^

ST. DOMINICK.

311

and leading him towards Imogen placed it in hers; then added, “ and thus I secure an armistice, sanctified by all the sacred ?£ laws of hospitality.”

The duke, bending one knee, pressed the hand presented to him to his lips ; then, turning to the chevalier with the strongest emotion, which he endeavoured to veil under an ill-affected air of raillery, he exclaimed :	‘c	Whatever may be the result

“ of my rash confidence, it is you who must ei be answerable for the effects, for I am “ no longer any thing but the thing you “ would have me.”

“ Be it so,” said the chevalier ; “ 1 pledge ie myself for your safety. But away with iC suspicion ; be the felicity of this moment “ illusive or real, let us enjoy it while it lasts.”

“ Agreed,” said the duke, with an air of vehement gaiety ; for, be it real or il-“ lusive, it is still felicity;” and he resumed his seat.

4< And to what fortunate circumstance

THE NOVICE OF

66 am I indebted for the happiness I now u enjoy ?” said Imogen, who had listened in silent agitation to the foregoing dialogue 3 te at a moment when I believed “ you, my dear chevalier, were in Eng-u land ; at a moment when I thought my-cC self lost to your remembrance, and un-u worthy of preserving it?”

> The recollection of what she had suffered since she last beheld him* rushed to her memory, and the tears involuntarily sprung to her eyes.

The chevalier, though deeply affected, replied in a grave and firm voice :	Lady,

the cause which has led me this night “ into your presence, is the same which has influenced every action of my life “ since I knew you !—yourself !—Hear fs me then, lady 3 give me for a few minutes “ thy patient attention, then judge of me “ as I am, not as I must lately have appear-“ ed to you—the deserter of her whom the “ world had deserted. Deep versed in every “ feature of that interesting character t

ST. DOMINICK.

313

ff had with so much scrutiny, with so much <c delight, made the object of my peculiar r‘ observance, acquainted with the elevated qualities of thy soul, the proud ambition “ of thy mind, the warmth and ardor of thy Cf feelings, the strength and tenderness of fr thy affections, and the irritable sensibili-(C ty, the fire, the enthusiasm, of thy san-<f guine disposition, I beheld you rush <f upon the world endowed with all those ce qualities, and capable of leading to the " most seraphic virtues ; but, if unaccompa-“ nied by prudence and common sense, most dangerous errors. I beheld you, <f unsophisticated and all-confiding, gene* <f rous, volatile, and ambitious, enter the great theatre of life. Anxious to play <f your own conspicuous part among a jea-‘f lous crowd of rival actors, enchanted “ with its gay illusions, the willing victim ff of its splendid cheats, deceived by an “ appearance, soothed by a smile, repulsed ff by a frown, won by the faintest gleam of “ sympathy, repelled by the faintest sha-

314

THE NOVICE OF

€< dow of dissimilarity, the being of im-" pulse,—every impression was received “ with a vivacity that exposed you to a “ train of evils. Dreading to be feared, fc you shunned the attainment of respect ; cr anxious to beloved, you pursued the ob-“ ject of your wishes through the medium ffof your admiration, and lost it. Justly f< estimating the treasures of genius, you displayed your own ; and when you “ thought yourself adored for its posses-“ sion, you were envied, hated, and tra-<e duced. O Imogen ! thy beauty might have been pardoned thee, thy graces (i forgiven ; but that genius which ele-Ci vated thee above the ordinary level of thy species, and raised thee above the “ vulgar errors a:nd vulgar prejudices, the false taste and false opinions of the fs world ; those talents, which set the com-“ petitorship of your own sex at defiance, tc and even awakened the rivalry of ours, “ raised against you woman’s deadliest tc foe—Envy ; whose destructive shaft*

ST. DOMINICK.

315

Cf like the Indian’s fire-tipt arrow, divides <f as it flies into countless streams of un-ff extinguishable flame, each fatal to its “ object. Charmed with that in others by <f which you blindly believed you charmed ee yourself, genius was always received ff with open arms without the union of “ virtue to recommend it. The tone of your character was soon understood by fe the interested and the vicious ; and arti-“ flee and duplicity soon learnt to produce <c those vibrations which sounded best in (( unison with their own selfish desires.— “ Every hour helping fresh fuel on the “ altar of envy, by the proud display of <f those talents policy should have taught " you to conceal ; every moment furnish-“ ing the insatiate appetite of slander with u that nutriment your own unguarded u conduct prepared ; resigning your do-mestic circumstances into the hands of ct mercenary strangers, and your conduct <f to the guidance of the giddy or the art-ful,—you rushed on to ruin. Yet the

316

THE NOVICE OF

“ warning voice of friendship still pursued “you; but, habituated to its monstrous “ murmur, it was soon heard without emo-“ tion, or listened to without effect.— “ Then I felt the necessity of some despe-“ rate effort which should rouse the dor-“ mant faculties of your slumbering réa-“ son. I addressed myself to your feel-“ ings in a manner that did violence to my “own; apparently abandoned you for “ ever, and it was generally believed that cc I had left Paris for England, when I “ only retired with the duke de Beauvil-cs liers to his villa in the neighbourhood of cfi St. Denis. I knew that Imogen, with-“ out any hope of dépendance but what <4 her own mind afforded, would find within “ herself an infinite resource, and that ge-“ nius, like a phoenix triumphing amidst u the flames, would rise victorious above “ the ruins of self-destroyed prosperity. ci To witness her triumph, to assist her in fi£ the subordinate means of effecting it, I 66 adopted an impenetrable disguise, and

ST. DOMINICK.

317

-‘ appeared before her as a Jewish usurer. <c It was then, O Imogen ! the goodness “ of your heart, the rectitude of your prin-“ ciples, and the fertility of your genius, ci became for the first time truly known to “ me ; and while I acted as the unsus-<c pected agent of your divine endeavours “ in favour of justice, humanity, and vir-“ tue, a thousand times was I on the point “ of throwing myself at your feet, and adoring that virtue I once dared to ar-“ raign. A mere Proteus in friendship, “ my next metamorphosis was in the cha-“ racter of a physician. Then, Imogen, c< I becamejhe witness of the most affect-“ ing of all human spectacles : I beheld thee the victim of the world’s ingrati-a tude and thy own sensibility, deprived <c of reason, stretched on the bed of sick-a ness; alone, comfortless, and forlorn; lC thy beauty faded, and thy genius fled. “ Where was then the crowd which lately “ bowed at the shrine of thy charms ?— iC Where was then the multitude that made

S18

'THE NOVICE OF

“ thee the popular idol of its homage ?— “ Alas ! not one solitary votarist survived “ the apparent wreck of thy golden pros-“ perity. But let thy heart triumph to “ learn that, amidst the herd of flatterers “ who surrounded thee, thou didst secure “ one invaluable and disinterested friend, “ who found an excuse for thy errors in “ their close alliance with thy virtues ; “ who was always active, but never ob-“ vious, in his wishes to serve you ; whose “ interest obtained for you the title of your “ ancestors; whose kindness enabled you “ to defray your debt of gratitude to the “ page of Montmorell ; who watched over “ you with the solicitude of a brother, yet “ assumed not even the privileges of an “acquaintance; and who, laying aside Ct the hereditary prejudices of his family, “ now visits the chateau de St. Dorval, to “ witness the virtuous triumphs of its mis-tress, and the felicity of his friend.— Need I name the duke de Beauvilliers ? Nay, my lord, 1 must be heard. To

ST. DOMINICK.

319

ri what purpose would you sîill affect con-f< cealment? To what purpose, indeed, u was it ever assumed, except that in an ic age when virtue is obsolete, you blush “for your singularity, and that you sus-“ pected few would give you credit for “ the honourable and disinterested senti-“ ments which influenced your generous u friendship for the young and lovely “ countess de St. Dorval ? But to conti-“ uue : as soon as the recovery of my 66 charming patient enabled her to travel, tc I pursued her steps until I beheld her “ safely lodged in the chateau de St. Dor-“ valï and then, in conformity with a u promise made to the duke de Beauvil-“ hers, I joined him in Bretagne, where “ he was stationed with his regiment ; but, “ though I was determined not to dispute “ with you the participation of that tri-“ umph you were gaining over every hu-“ man frailty, by the unassisted energy of “ your own mind, think not that for a ^ moment 1 resigned my interest in my

320

THE NOVICE OF

66 precious charge ; no. I established a re-“ gular correspondence with your Proven-“ çal agent, and received constant and “ circumstantial accounts of your pro-“ gressive attainment of every excellence ; “ until the period of your probation being “ expired, I informed the duke of my in-tention to visit Provence, or rather to C{ make a pilgrimage of the heart to the <c shrine of virtue in its fairest form. Bu-“ siness of a particular nature called the cc duke at the same time to Avignon ; and ct as he did not wish to make a public ap-c( pearance, we determined to take up our “ residence incog, at the villa of the duke's “ agent, who resides in thé vale of Comp-<f tat Benaison. Anxious to observe you, “ without being myself observed, I en-“ gaged in all those sacred offices dear to “ benevolence, performing those duties “ imposed by humanity. Under thesanc-“ tion of a pilgrim's garb, and with the help of a little medical skill, I obtained “ an easy admission into the house of

ST. DOMINICK.

321

li mourning, the abode of misery, or the “dwelling* of disease; and there I still “ traced the track of thy footsteps—there u I still caught the reverberated blessing “ which echoed from lip to lip when thy u name was pronounced, and found thy “ eulogium flowing from every heart — “ The duke, to whom I used sometimes to u recount the various interesting little “ anecdotes my wanderings afforded, and “ always fond of tracing nature to those simple haunts where she appears least “ modified by art and worldly forms, adopt-“ ed a similar disguise with that I had “ chosen ; and we haunted together for more than a week the neighbourhoods *€ of de Montargis and St. Dorval, some-tf times botanizing among the mountains, but oftener studying the character of the “ ancient Provençals in the simple con-“ versation and manners of their unsophis-4t ticated descendants. This evening, 44 which I intended should be the last of <c our adventure, as we were returning to VOL. IV.	p

THE NOVICE OF

the villa of our host, the cry of misery reached us from the cottage of Justin, iC as we passed near it, and we met the ff unfortunate husband of the dying Clau* c< dine flying for relief to her whom he be-lieved under heaven alone could dis-“ pense it. Need I dwell on the affecting ff scene that followed ? Need I add that the friends of Imogen could no longer “ resist throwing themselves at her feet, and adoring those virtues whose divine exertions they had witnessed? O Imo-f‘ gen! the last year of thy life will, I “ trust, prove the guiding moral of thy fu-“ ture existence. The danger of a bound-46 less ambition fo,r unrivaled superiority “ in the female character thou hast already V fatally experienced ; and the insuffi-“ ciency of genius unaccompanied by pru-“ dence, by that anticipating perception ff of the effects and consequences of our “ actions, even independent of their mo-tives, to conduct its possessor through c‘ the world with safety and happiness.

ST. DOMINICK.

323

you have practically learned. But, if the principles which govern your pre-" sent extend to your future life,, you may “ look upon the errors of the past without 4‘ remorse, and esteem them but as the “ price paid by the frailty of human na-“ ture for the purchase of wisdom, virtue, u and experience.”

The chevalier ceased to speak : the conflict of varying emotions which had assailed the heart of Imogen, while with breathless attention she hungupon his detail, still seemed to enchain her faculties, and bade defiance to the articulation of those feelings which agitated her mind. The gratitude, the amazement, with which she had learnt that the liberal usurer, the solicitous physician, was still the friend of her life and the guardain of her safety, had not yet withdrawn their strong expression from her face, while the certainty that de Sorville had had a coadjutor in his ten* derness and anxiety for his ward, communicated an emotion of rapture to her

324

THE NOVICE OF

heart, whose cause she scarcely understood, and dared not to investigate; and a sense of the great obligations she owed to his generous though concealed exertions overwhelmed her with gratitude and confusion.

After an uninterrupted pause of some minutes, Imogen addressed herself to her guardian : her voice, at first broken and inarticulate, gradually breathed a firmer tone; the perturbation of her air subsided ; sighs no longer impeded her utterance, nor tears dimmed the expression of her eyes; from the grace and eloquence of animated gestures, she gave a superadded existence to her words; and while,, with the meek supplication of a penitent, she endeavoured to extenuate her frailties, she awakend admiration, and elicited esteem. She began by tracing the errors of her life to their primary source, and found it in the nature of her education at the convent of St, Dominick.

“ We are all,” said she, <( in a degree,

ST. DOMINICK.

325

“ the beings of early habits and education ; 'f the faintest impression in the first era of “ existence frequently gives a feature to the character, which becomes the leading trait of future life; and the remotest as-Cf sociation of ideas communicates a tinge (o “ the mind, which forms the predominant (i colouring of our future actions. It was lf amidst the cloistral privacy of St. “ Dominick, the supposed school of rigid self-denial, where all human passion is thought to stand subdued, and religion u to trample upon the faculties of nature, (< that ambition’s strongest root was plant-“ ed in my youthful bosom ; and the germ “ of vanity nurtured in my mind by those iC who, deceiving the world and themselves, “ part not with the propensities incident “ to their nature, but only change the “ objects which would have engrossed them “ in the world for others of a different “ but not a more laudable character.

“ The proud desire of adding a new saint “ to their convent list dimmed the small

THE NOVICE OF

44 portion of penetration bigoted ignorance 44 had left to the sisterhood among whom I 44 was reared; and., mistaking the ardor 44 and enthusiasm of my character for the 44 inspirations of heavenly grace, they 44 made me the medium of their own pious 44 ambition, and unconsciously awakened <{ mine beyond all power of extinction. 4‘ Wondered at for those talents which were 44 only eminent by comparison ; revered 44 for that piety which was the child of my “ imagination rather than the offspring of 44 my reason, no voice was grateful to my 44 ear that spoke not in the language of 44 praise; no accent reached my heart but 64 through the medium of vanity. Removed “ from the Convent of St. Dominick to the 44 Chateau de Montmorell, a new source of 44 ambition was opened to my views: op-posed, oppressed, repeated victories, (i easily obtained over baseless arguments “ or illiberal opinions, confirmed my ru-“ ling passion, while a species of heroism awakened my soul to the touch of ty-

ST. DOMINICK.

327

*cranny; anil, like the palm-tree, I rose Cc in my own estimation proportionally to the efforts made to subdue me. A ff succession of unexpected circumstances “ (here Imogen hesitated and blushed) “ opened some new springs of emulation in my mind ; and the fond approbation of a doting partial father, the friendship and affection of a chevalier de Sorville, ope-“ rated as a new stimulus to new exertions “ and new views. Thus dangerously org-tf anised, I rushed upon life: sweet, indeed, were the illusive visions of my heart and imagination—but transient as sweet. tf Thus far, my best friend, have I cn-deavoured to trace (he source of that fatal “ ambition which you have louke;! upon to “ be the accessory to that train of evils by “ which my worldly noviciate was pursued; “ but for that abandonment of social pru-“ dence, that neglect of domestic duty, by t( which I unhappily involved the fate of “ others in my own, I have no extenuation “ to offer. Prudence should be the govern-

328

THE NOVICE OF

“ ing principle of woman’s existence ; do-“ mestic life her peculiar sphere ; no genius, {( no talents, no rank, can exempt her from tf an observance of the Jaws of the former, from an attention to the duties of the lat-sf ter. To neglect both is to violate the “ sacred laws of social happiness; and to <f frustrate the all-wise intentions of that Providence who framed them. Such, I ft feel, is the theory of that truly feminine virtue which I have hitherto far from ff observed—but its illustration will, I hope, “ be traced in the conduct of my future “ life.

Imogen for a moment paused; her colour changed; a slight convulsion passed across her features ; some secret struggle seemed to shake, her soul; but the conflict was transient; her emotion subsided : calm and dignified, yet with averted eyes, a blushing cheek, and a low and tremulous accent, she turned towards the duke de Beauvilliers. u To you, my lord,” she said, <e my obligations are of a nature not

ST. DOMINICK.

329

to be expressed nor acquitted by a few “ words. The interest you have taken in u ray self-created sufferings; the gener-t( ous exertions you have made in my fa-€i vour ; the solicitous friendship with “ which, unknown and unsuspected, you <c have watched over the late vicissitudes “ of my life, have awakened a sentiment “ in my heart which can only cease to ex-“ ist when that heart ceases to throb—a “ sentiment pure, lively, and indelible, “ and formed of the best emotions of gra-“ titude, respect, esteem, and friendship.’* Then, turning towards the chevalier, her cheeks’ warm blush faded to a deadly paleness, her eyes bathed in tears, her voice faint and inarticulate, she added; O thou “ beloved friend of my father ! saviour of “ my peace, my honour, and my life ! whom “ neither my follies nor my errors, my im-i( prudence nor my ingratitude, could wean <s from the watchful care of thy unworthy charge ; knowing what she has been, “ can you accept of her as she is ? or, still p 2

THE NOVICE OF

“ rejected as your wife, is she now only cc sought as your friend?”

The existence of the agitated Imogen seemed to hang upon the question, as pale, panting, and breathless, she hid her face in her bosom, and extended her trembling hands to de Sorville.

The chevalier, seizing them, and, falling at her feet, replied : u Be this my an-“ swer: Imogen, beloved even in all thy “ errors and all thy virtues, thou art now “ adored.”

Imogen, faint and overcome, sank lifeless on his shoulder, while the tears that flowed from her eyes relieved the dreadful oppression of her heart ; yet she wept not alone, for the cheek which pressed hers was wet with a teat her eye had not shed. The chevalier at length arose, and turned towards the duke, who was leaning against the mantle-piece, his head enveloped in his cloke.

“ Great and amiable friend,” said de Sorville, tenderly embracing him, “ wit-

ST. DOMINICK.

331

u ness of my sufferings, witness of my fe-“ licity, give me your congratulations, for li they are yet wanting to my happiness.”

“ You have them,” returned the duke, with a voice dignified and firm.

The chevalier looked on him for a moment, then, taking him by the hand, led him towards Imogen. u And have you,” he exclaimed, <f nothing to say to the No-(i vice of St. Dominick ?”

The Minstrel of Provence fell at her feet.

6£ To the captive of Laon?” added de Sorville, with a smile.

De Montargis covered the hand of Imogen with impassioned kisses.

“ To the wife of your friend?” continued the chevalier.

The duke de Beauvilliers arose; an air of virtue, dignity, and pride, involved his whole form, yet still his emotions did not permit him to speak : he threw himself into the arms of de Sorville, but their em*-brace was of a different character from the first.

332

THE NOVICE OF

De Sorville, leading the duke to the couch where Imogen sat, placed hinrbe-side her; then, resuming his own seat, to relieve the delicacy of their situation, he gave a new turn to the conversation, and informed Imogen that the purchases made by the counterfeit Jew had been long since conveyed back to, the hotel de St. Dorval.

“ Then I am still a debtor,” said Imogen with a faint smile; “ but who is now u my creditor ?”

“ Oh ! of that hereafter,” said the chevalier, looking over at the duke, who changed colour.

Imogen’s eyes followed those of deSor-ville, and she caught the infection of de Beauvillier’s confusion.

“ The principal,” said she, smiling, “1 . “ can easily pay off, for my treasury at « present would form a little subsidy for <c a German prince ; but the interest which gratitude imposes can never be defrayed, “ but with every hour of my life must con-“ tinue to accumulate.”

ST. DOMINICK.

333

At that moment Geoffry entered to announce supper. Imogen arose, and presented her hand to de Sorville, who, placing it in that of the duke, gaily exclaimed: " Come, my lord, over the rites of hospitality even the family feuds of "other times held no jurisdiction; and, cf while you thus lead your hereditary ene-“ my to the banquet, you lay a foundation for an inviolable hereditary friendship.” Imogen endeavoured to smile, and the duke, with a hand that still trembled to the touch of hers, led her in silence to the $alon-a-manger.

Imogen vainly endeavoured to do the honours of her table with her usual ease and grace. She spoke but little, ate less, and, thoughtful and abstracted, seemed unconscious of the sighs that breathed on her lips. The duke trifled with his knife and fork, and touched nothing ; but eagerly quaffed off* repeated draughts of wine ; talked much, and on the most indifferent subjects, with vehemence and passion, or

334

THE NOVICE OS

sank at intervals into profound and melancholy reveries. The chevalier alone preserved the wonted equanimity of his manner; finished the broken sentences of the agitated Imogen, as if he anticipated all she would have said ; or explained the wild and incoherent sentiments of the duke, when he was scarcely understood by himself.

The free circulation of the sparkling goblet, the disordered air, burning cheek, and flashing eyes of de Beauvilliers, soon warned Imogen to depart; and having paid the salutations of the night to her illustrious guests, she retired to her own apartment.

ST. DOMINICK.

335

CHAP. XL.

To chase each partial purpose from his breast,

And thro’ the mist of passion and of sense.

And thro* the tossing tide of chance and pain,

To hold its course unfaltering; while the voice Of Truth and Virtue, up the steep ascent Of Nature, calls him to his great reward,

Th1 applauding smile of Heav’n.

Akenside.

Oh ! che felice pianti,

Che amibile martis,

Pur che si possa dir,

Quil cor e mio.

De due bell alme amaute.

Un aime, allor si fa,

Un aime che non ha,

Che un sol desio.

Metastasio.

AT an early hour the following morning Beatrice entered her lady’s room, to preside as usual at her toilet, but found her already risen and dressed, although she had heard her pacing the adjoining apart-

336	THE	NOVICE	OF

ment, which lay over her own, till a very late hour. Beatrice observed also that she was just dressed as if she had not divested herself of a single article since she had last seen her; and as she had been forbid attending her to bed, (a thing most unusual,) she was now full of anxious curiosity with respect to the strange incidents of the preceding evening, which had afforded such ample matter of wonder and surmise to every domestic member of the chateau, and to herself in particular; she had just begun with,

ff Well, good my lady, there is no end to wonderments and miracles in this “ world, as monsieur Geoffry said last “ night, with respect to the appearance of monseigneur the duke within the walls of the chateau de St. Dorval—”

When Imogen, taking the veil she held in her hand, slung it over her own head, so as to conceal the upper part of her face, and left the room ; but not before Beatrice, had observed that her cheek was colour-

ST. DOMINICK.

337

less, her eye red and swollen, and her looks haggard and melancholy. Beatrice looked after her lady with tearful eyes, then sat down on the chair from which Imogen had risen, and wept the effects, though ignorant of the cause.

Imogen, after a few turns on the terrace, entered the saloon. She found the chevalier already there, walking up and down the room, and conversing with old Geolfry, who was laying out the breakfast table. When Imogen appeared, he sprang forward to receive her; and, gazing on the face she endeavoured to veil from his penetration, lie stifled a half-breathed sigh, took her hand in silence, and pressed it to his lips.

At that moment the duke entered the room : he would have retired unperceived, but the chevalier’s quick eye catching a glimpse of him in a large mirror which hung opposite the door, he exclaimed. Come back, my.lord ; the countess has ci another hand for you.”

THE NOVICE OF

The duke returned, and coldly bowed on the hand presented to him by the chevalier.

In the appearance of de Beauvilliers a visible change had taken place since the preceding night : the artificial flow of spirits which had then animated his manners now no longer enlivened them ; his air was abstracted, his eyes sunken, his complexion livid, and the expression of his countenance wild and despairing.

“ It is a pity,” said the chevalier, as they seated themselves at the breakfast-table, C{ it is a pity that the motive of an action should not aiwajs influence its “ effects. I told you last night, my lord, “ when you were quaffing off such plente-“ ous draughts to the health and happiness of your friends, that you would this “ morning pay the same tribute to the god £f of ebriety for the violation of his laws, as the selfish intemperate who commits “ his excesses uninfluenced by any such “ generous and social motives $ and, if I

ST. DOMINICK.

339

u am to judge from your looks this morn-“ ing, my assertion was prophétie.0

The duke, rousing from the sullen torpor which had hitherto involved him, with a forced laugh and an air of gaiety replied :

Why, yes, I believe I was rather in an Anacreontic mood last night ; and, ie to confess the truth, I often thought the “ philosophy of the Teen bard the only (( true philosophy upon earth : while the ei sage pores by the midnight lamp over “ the musty volumes of distant ages, to 66 seek the alchemic secret by which hap-tC piness is to be extracted from the dross “ of life, give me a shorter and sweeter “ path to information; let me thus raise 6i the sparkling goblet to my eager lip, and quaff olf immortality !”

Thus saying, the duke poured out a glass of rich cordial which stood on the table, and, drinking it off, said to Imogen, “ You see, madam, your wine is like the “ nepenthe of Helen, for it gives the cares

THE NOVICE OF

“ as well as the senses of your guests to “ oblivion.”

Imogen for the first time now raised her timid looks to the face of de Beauvilliers ; his eye met hers ; a slight convulsion passed across his features; the paleness of her cheek was suffused with the crimson of a transient blush.

The duke arose, threw up the sash of the window, and; calling to his esquire, who had just passed it on horseback, ordered his horses to be led out.

Imogen and the chevalier both arose.

You cannot mean to leave us 1” demanded the latter, in a tone of amazement.

“ My departure is unavoidable,” returned the duke in a hurried tone :	I	must

ie either appear publicly in the country, or t€ instantly leave it—the business which " brought me here is finished. It is requisite I should instantly go to Paris, and *r from thence, with the king’s permission, « I shall set olf for England with the duke f‘ de Sully, who shortly visits that country u as ambassador from the French court.**

ST. DOMINICK.

341

u This is as unexpected as it is disap-ct pointing to us,” said de Sorville, looking at Imogen; “ but, my dear duke, friend-<c ship has already exacted so much from “ you, that what remains for her to de-mand is not worthy of you to refuse.— " Do you not plead with me, my sweet " Imogen ? Do not your wishes unite with mine to detain our mutual friend ?” Certainly !” replied Imogen, in a voice scarcely articulate, while the colouring of her cheek varied alternately from white to red.

“Then you remain with us,” added the chevalier, et at least for a few days?” fc A few days !” repeated the duke with vehemence ; cc you might as well name a <f few ages !”

“ Come, come, my dear duke,” continued the chevalier, r< L know you can have “ no such immediate pressing occasion to visit Paris ; and, even though you had, “ upon such an event as this, when the “ destiny of two friends so dear to you is

THE NOVICE OF

c'on the point of being twined in one,, “ when—”

“ Upon such occasions/' interrupted the duke, in a voice full of emotion,, even the “ presence of a friend is an intrusion ; at least, were I so situated, I—” and he sank on the seat of the window near which he stood..

“ And yet,” said the chevalier, cf if mi-“ sery calls for the sympathy of friendship c< as its only alleviation, so does the excess <c of happiness call for its participation, as “ its only possible mode of increase. In a few days I shall be the happiest of “ men ; but even my felicity will admit of “ addition, if from your hands. I shall re-tC ceive the beloved object who can alone confirm it. Yes, my lord, add to the “ obligations we mutually owe you, by “ acting as a father to this amiable being, “-whose mother has so often lavished on cs you the tenderest caresses of a parent; “ from your hands let me receive the “ daughter of her who considered you as

ST. DOMINICK.

343

<{ the son of her tender adoption. She has <c no father; supply to her the place of “ one. Look at her, my lord; she is in-“ deed silent; but if those blushes could « speak, if those half-breathed sighs were ({ understood, if the eloquence of those (C gentle tears was acknowledged, your “ heart would not thus turn against the e( supplication which hers sends up with “ mine.”

“ Drive me not mad,” interrupted the duke, with a voice and air of wildness, and starting from his seat: “you know “ not what you say—you know not what “ you do. Worlds would not tempt me cf to remain another moment beneath this “ always fatal roof. My part is now fi-“ nished, 1 can act no longer; be happy, “ for you deserve to be so ; while I—”

The voice of Beauvilliers failed him ; he hid his face in his cloke, and paused. Imogen, pale and faint, yet still endeavouring to support herself, sank on a couch. De Sorville gazed on them both with looks of emotion and apparent amazement.

THE NOVICE OF

The duke at last raised his head ; his eyes were red and inflamed, but their fire was softened by the moisture of tears ; he approached the chevalier, and embraced him—then exclaimed :

" Farewell !—May you be as happy as “ your virtues deserve you should be ! But “ in the midst of your joys, God of hea-“ ven !—yes, of your joys, steal from the (e glowing era of love one precious mo-<f ment, and devote it to the recollection of him who was your friend at the mo-“ ment he might have found a sanction in “ his heart for being your enemy ; and who, “ amidst the general wreck of all he own-“ ed, of all he prized, still preserved his “ honour pure and unsullied : then envy " him his triumphs, and give him your “ applause ; for he, who has learned to vanquish himself, claims the applause “ of the greatly virtuous as his reward.” The chevalier embraced him tenderly, but in silence and in visible emotion.— The dignified, though wild expression

ST. DOMINICK.

345

of sorrow which had shed itself over the countenance of the duke now changed its character as he released himself from the arms of de Sorvilie, and turned towards Imogen : his eye’s burning glance melted in tears of passion,, every feature was touched with tenderness and despair ; fortitude appeared to struggle with both, as snatching a last and ardent look at her, and he exclaimed :—

“ Farewell, lady, for ever !”

“ For ever!” repeated Imogen, stretching out her hands impulsively cowards him, and raising the head which had hitherto drooped on her throbbing bosom ; this simple action flung aside her veil, and her countenance, no longer shaded, now appeared touched with an expression scarcely human.

Could a spirit of heaven feel an agony concomitant to the bliss of which its pure and sublimated nature is susceptible, such is the character and expression the inspired fancy of the sublimest genius would

VOL. iv.	Q

346

THE NOVICE OF

attach to the divine countenance of the celestial sufferer.

“Farewell, then, for ever!” murmured Imogen in a voice low and tremulous. De Beauvilliers fell at her feet; he seized the trembling hands which were still extended to solicit a last clasp—he raised them to his eyes, and they were bathed in tears ; he pressed them to his lips, and Imogen endeavoured to withdraw them.

No !” exclaimed he, “ thou shalt not “ deprive me of my triumph. The greater <c resignation already made, this, even this, “ is nothing.”

He arose, and still firmly grasping the hands of Imogen, he placed them in those of de Sorville, and, clasping.them both in his own, he added, in a deep and affecting voice :—

“ Thy prayer is heard; receive her from “ my hands: now, now, the victory is “ mine! for know that I too once dared “ to adore her by whom thou art now be-ft loved ; for her I would have forfeited all.

ST. DOMINICK.

347

u My honour, my ambition, my duty, a “ betrothed bride, a tender father, a ge-tc nerous sovereign, weighed against Imo-44 gen were but as a feather in the scale “ of consideration; but she who led me to “ the edge of the precipice was my saviour. “ I was rejected, schooled into viitue, and 44 taught to kiss the rod beneath whose lash “ I bled. But the dream is all, all over; 44 and this might have been spared; but it u is but just you should know the full va-44 lue of the prize you possess ; it is but “ just you should expiate the dissimu-44 lation of my past reserve towards you by 44 this confession. In witnessing the hap-44 piness of my friend, I too, lam—happy Ci—Oh! most happy!”

Here a convulsive laugh broke from the faltering lips of de Beauvilliers : and, bending his head over the united hands he pressed in his, they were bathed with his tears. The silence of a moment ensued; then, raising his hands and eyes to heaven, he faintly exclaimed :

348

THE NOVICE OF

“ God for ever bless you both !” and, covering his face with his cloke, he rushed to the door.

The chevalier, who during the whole affecting period appeared lost in silent and motionless amazement, now sprang after the duke, and leading him back, firmly exclaimed ;

“Stay, my lord; neither amazement nor ce emotion have induced me to interrupt “ the unexpected declaration of your sen-“ timents. Suffer me then to claim a mo-“ Ynent’s hearing for the expression of “ mine.”

The duke, with an air of surprise and impatience, bowed assent, and paced the room with a hurried'step, while the chevalier, leaning against the frame of the window, coolly added:—

g There are injuries, my lord, so refin-“ ed, so impalpably delicate, that even the “ guardian strictness of the law cannot “ hold them in its cognizance; for, oh! its “ watchful power cannot retribute the

ST. DOMINICK.

349

u mind’s injured peace; it cannot raise to “ life the soul’s withered hopes, nor heal “ those gangrene wounds which perfidy C( has given to tender and all-confiding ff hearts; but nature, my lord, has erected “ a tribunal in every manly heart, to which “ the injured fly to seek redress, and which “ avengeswhat it cannot compensate—the ft tribunal of honour !”

“ Sir, sir!” interrupted the duke with vehemence, “ I do not, nay I will not un-“ derstand you.”

I “ The countess de St, Dorval,” continued the chevalier, unmoved by the interruption, ff is the daughter of my soul’s “ dearest friend; she was my ward, and is “ my affianced bride ; in each and all of ff these sacred characters her injuries are “ mine. Nay, my lord, I must be heard. ff When first the spirit of adventure in one ff of its romantic vicissitudes betrayed her “ to your notice, you found her like a bcau-ft tiful flower, blushing and fragrant, in “ her native solitude ; you left her fading

THE NOVICE OF

and drooping for the loss of those ca-“ ressing attentions, which, once received, cc had become necessary to her existence. Cf Transplanted to the world’s wide gar-“ den, even in the blood-stained path of “ war, again her sweetness captivated all your senses; in the delirium of passion et you would have forced her for ever from “ the parent stem, round whose trunk she <c had but just entwined. You prolfered <c love, and she believed you; you prof-“ fered ruin, ruin to yourself, and she rejected: you she saved, but herself she “ could not. Still affectionate, though hope-“ less; faithful, though desponding; love, fatal, though cherished, still chased from ff her bosom the halcyon power of peacer “ till virtue subdued what even reason could not banish. Then to another's “ vows she hearkened, her promise plight-“ ed, her hand bestowed, and peace, and “ happiness, and honour, smiled on her future life ; when you, my lord, free “ from the tie which had hitherto formed

ST. DOMINICK.

351

61 a chain in the barrier of your mutual “ wishes, again appeared, and beneath “ the sanction of her betrothed husband's ,c friendship (who, all confiding, suspected “ not the man whom most he loved,) “ sought her presence, revived the faded 61 spark of latent passion, and once more <c taught her struggling heart to love, and ts to despair. Pride, virtue, and delicacy, <c taught her to conceal that which she ct could not subdue; and beneath the gau-6t dy veil of pleasure she hid the wounds ss of an anguished soul. And now, my lord, the nature of her injuries, and con-« sequently of mine, being thus briefly in-<c vestigated, the law of reparation de-„4t mands its own enforcement/’

“Enforce it!” frantically exclaimed de Beauvilliers,” throwing himself at the chevalier s feet, and tearing open the bosom of his dress with one hand, lie presented his sword with the other to de Sorville ; who, flinging it away, and raising the duke in his arms, said with a dignified smile:

35 2

THE NOVICE OF

“ No, my lord, I thirst not for venge-6( ance, but for justice: 1 demand it for <e that all-suffering and injured, innocent; “ I demand it for myself, and, lastly, 1 de-“ mand it for you. Your errors have been (c the errors of an ardent and unsophisti-« cated nature, of a romantic disposition, (t of impetuous and enthusiastic feelings “ too freely induged ; but your sufferings “ have been such as might break the heart <f which sustained them. Wedded from “ principles of honour to the woman you “ did not love, while your conduct towards her was irreproachable, your secret <c thoughts were now fixed on the perfec-“ tions of her you had resigned. Every letter with which, you honoured me “ breathed, unknown to yourself, the des-“ pondency of an enamoured soul ; and when free and unshackled you again ap-“ peared in the world, while others be-*■ lieved that the spell of ambition lured “ you to a court, I alone beheld you drawn from the beloved solitude of despair by

ST. DOMINICK.

353

ff the magic of reviving love and latent hope:—and then while I blamed I pi-“ tied, while 1 pitied I admired. The “ witness of those immunities with which “ others were invested, yet without da-ring to make known your own claims, ff without even daring to complain, I be-“ held you involved in those silent suf-ferings peculiar to a love tender, ar-dent, and irrevocable, as yours, when op-“ posed by reason, by prudence, and by “ honour. I saw the difficulty by which “ you were restained from opposing your-self to the host of slanderous enemies “ the superiority and unguarded conduct of the object of our mutual solicitude elicited. We conversed on the subject, and at my instigation you flew to “ warn her with the anxiety of love, while te you fancied you appeared but in the “ character of friendship : but the agita-tion in which I found you on your re-turn convinced me of the danger of the* Q ^

TtiE NOVICE OF

task you had undertaken ; yet the proud “ triumph which basked in your eyes when ff you pressed me impulsively toyour heart, convinced me honour was still victorious “ over the weakness of affection. Again, f£ in the shades of Vaucluse I witnessed its triumph—yes, while 1 pursued your steps in those haunts long since devoted ff to the indulgence of cureless passion, I “ beheld you, in' the midst of that pro-“ found solitude, wjthin the very grasp of “■ temptation, still fly for refuge to thy honour, and still find it there; for the *e sympathy of taste, of sentiment, con-c< ducted in the same moment three vota-rists to the shrine of Petrarch, each un-“ known to the other, and what then " passed there unseen I observed. But fr then, as now, the struggle was already <c over, and you doubtless then beheld in te her whom you have now bestowed on <c me the wife of your friend only. But, my lord, while thus secure in your own strength, proud in your own conscious-

ST. DOMINICK.

355

cf ness, that bosom whose peace you have “ destroyed, that heart whose happiness “ you have frustrated, calls, though si-ce lently, for the reparation of its injuries.” The chevalier paused : he advanced towards Imogen, who, motionless and pale, betrayed no appearance of life but what the expression of unutterable anguish marked in her countenance; he gazed on her for a moment in silence, till his eyes swam in tears, his frame shook, his breast heaved with convulsive sighs. Imogen stretched out her arms towards him ; he received her within his embrace, and pressed her for a moment to his breast; then, holding her from him, he turned towards the duke, who, no longer able to move, leaned against a pillar for support.

My lord/' he exclaimed, while an air of solemn dignity'invested his whole person, and a celestial light seemed to shed its lumination over his countenance : “ my “ lord, you have had your victory—I too am ambitious of a triumph!” Then,

THE NOVICE OF

taking the cold and trembling hand of Imogen» he placed i( in that of de Beau-villiers, and, clasping both in his own, he raised his eyes to heaven, and in a voice deep, solemn, and affecting, added : “Son “ of Montargis ! daughter of St. Dorval ! “ be happy ! May the God who created “ you for each other confirm you in virtue “ and felicity, pure and lasting as the frailty of human nature will admit of! and may your earthly connection be but “ as the beautiful symbol of that eternal “ union which awaits you in another and “ a better world !”

Then, encircling them both in his arms, after a moment’s pause, he added :

“ Farewell! I leave you in peace, I “ shall soon meet, you in happiness : you “ are both triumphant in virtue, nor do I tc depart subdued ; but respect my feel-fl ings, nor violate them by benevolent but c‘ unavailing intrusion. Beloved and vir-“ tuous beings, once more farewell !”

With these words, falteringly pro-

ST. DOMINICK.

357

nounced, de Sorvilie loosed himself from the grasp of the almost-fainting Imogen^ and, resigning her into the arms of Beau-villiers, with a countenance in which heroism and tenderness were blended, but with a firm, a dignified, and determined, air, he left the room.

The silence of amazement, of ecstacy unutterable, shed around its stilly spell ; many minutes elapsed, and all was still delirium. De Beauvilliers, still entranced, hung over, in doubtful bliss, his precious burthen; Imogen, dying the death of joy, lifeless, yet with life, panted on his bosom, till her heart catching a vital impulse from the throb of his, she awakened to a sense of her situation ; their eyes met for the first time since the birth of their felicity, transport illumined the mutual glance, and they gazed round for the participation of that God-like friend who had been the creator of their bliss—but he was gone. x\ sense of all he had sacrificed for their sakes flushed on their minds, and the bum-

358

THE NOVICE OP

ing glance of novel and sanctioned love was mellowed by the tear of mourning friendship ; they withdrew from each other, and wept apart. In the sympathy^ of their sorrow again they approached ; their tears mingled as they flowed, and lost their bitterness as they mingled;—in the similitude of their kindred feelings, the half-breathed exclamations of love and happiness breathed on their lips ; but, amidst the murmurs of exquisite felicity, gratitude poured its blessings on the head of him whose virtue had bestowed it.

ST. DOMINICK.

359

CONCLUSION

No more the thirsty entrance of this soil Shall damp her lips with her own children’s blood ; No more shall trenching* war channel her fields. Nor bruise her fiow’rets with the armed hoofs Of hostile paces.—These opposed eyes.

Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven,

All of one nature, of one substance bred.

Did lately meet on the intestine shock And furious close of civil butchery,

Shall now in mutual well-beseeming* ranks March all one way, and be no more oppos’d Against acquaintance, kindred, allies ;

The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife,

No more shall cut his master.

Shakespeare.

THE chevalier de Sorville fled from the chateau de St. Dorval to the villa de Fiora. On the preceding night his servant had arrived with horses from Avignon, and by the following morning every thing was in secret readiness for his departure ; for im-

360

THE NOVICE OF

pulse held no influence over his conduct, and his actions were always the result of reason, of virtue, and of truth. The loving and beloved beings, whom his goodness had snatched from the lowest abyss of virtuous misery to the highest degree of all human felicity, respected his commands too highly to venture on.their immediate violation. But, as friendship only can administer to suffering friendship, and as decorum prevented the countess de St. Dorval from continuing the duke de Beau-villiers as her guest, or from uniting herself to him who still wore the ft customary suit of solemn black” for another, after a few precious days, snatched by love from the impious mandate of cold propriety, de Beauvilliers tore himself from the pure delights of hallowed tenderness, sacrificed his wishes to gratitude and prudence, and followed his great and generous friend to his voluntary exilement. But sweet are the sacrifices which virtue exacts ; and the felicity of de Beauvilliers* heart was now

ST. DOMINICK.

361

sanctified by the approval of his reason and his honour. In the absence of her lover and her friend, the happy Imogen resigned herself to the most delicious reveries; even this enforced and temporary absence gave a new character to her passion, and while it bestowed repose on the poignant agitation of her feelings, it min-gled with the pure and lively ardor of a mistress the tender and anticipated solicitudes of a wife. Meantime an epistolary correspondence supplied the place of a more intimate intercourse; and in the constant commutation of refined and elegant sentiments, warmed by mutual tenderness, and animated by playful wit, the sympathy of the mind as well as of the heart was still evinced and still discovered with new and reciprocal sensations of pride and transport.

In less than three months from the day of his departure, the duke de Beauvilliers returned to the chateau de St. Dorval ; and, in the presence of the friends, de-

THE NOVICE OF

pendants, tenantry, and vassals, of their respective families, the last survivor of the illustrious house of St. Dorval bound up her destiny and future life in that of the chief of the noble family of Montargis.— Religious and party prejudice beheld the union with incredulity and amazement ; but the incense which virtue and reason offered up on the altar of love and philanthropy to the god of truth ascended to heaven. On the day of the solemnization of their nuptials, the duke de Beauvilliers presented to his lovely bride the following letter

From the Chevalier de Sorville.

When these lines shall reach the <f hands of Imogen, she will be the wife of <c the duke de Beauvilliers, but she will cf not be less the friend of de Sorville.— rt That heart so intimately known to me, iC that tender heart which ever makes the ff woes of . others all its own, even in the ?c midst of all its abundant joys, will often

ST. DOMINICK.

S6S

€e heave a sigh to the memory of him for ft whom no joys exist; and Imogen, in re-ceiving from the hand of love the rosy “ wreath of bliss, will dew its leaves with pity’s tear, shed to the recollection of f< him for whom no roses bloom. Suffer “ me then, O amiable being! to consum-mate the happiness of which I proudly ‘ boast myself to be the author, by assu-“ ring you the misery you deplore lives but in the apprehensions of thy too-<e grateful heart; and to confess that the only chance of happiness I could rescue “ from a fate but sparingly enriched with “joys, was in the resignation of her whose misery would have confirmed mine, con-<c firmed it in the consciousness that I was “ its author: for, O Imogen ! thy virtue, tc not thy heart, still gave thee to my wish-es ; and in the first moment of our first interview, I saw that that heart was no longer at thy own disposal ; and that, though thou didst return with me to thy “ new-found father, thy heart remained

THE NOVICE OF

ff with thy amiable conqueror at Laon r “ and yet 1 did not then suspect that the birth of thy tenderness was of an ante-rior date, nor do I now blame the deli-ff cacy of thy reserve ; may it ever be the modest characteristic of a woman’s timid tender feelings, when under the all-per-“ vading influence of that sentiment she S( was created so profoundly to feel 1— <c Long did I watch the secret workings of thy heart, nor ever suspected the selfish u motive of my anxiety, until I fancied I “ beheld thy hopes expire on the bosom “ of impossibility ; and then from the dy-“ ing embers of thy desponding love, mine “ received its first awakening beam of (( hope. Believing what I wished, I fan-“ cied I was dear to you, and willingly “ embraced the illusion which shed the u colouring of love over the ardently-ex-“ pressed feelings of gratitude and esteem. “ But, O Imogen ! when in the world I « watched the first moment of thy revived “ intercourse with the object of thy first-

ST. DOMINICK.

365

“ born tenderness—when I beheld that “■ impassioned communion of soul which €C a single glance supported between you, then, even then, J resigned thee for ever ; “ then I laid the basis of that conduct which was to confirm your future hap-tf piness—the happiness of the most ami* f< able of men—but which to pursue, in the frailty of human weakness, cost some tc vital pangs to a heart which now is “ proudly victorious over itself. As the husband of Imogen I must have been “ wretched, for I must have been guilty; “ as her friend I must be happy, for 1 ‘f have rendered her so. Farewell, then, ff dear and virtuous friend, farewell!-— ff Let me continue to hold the second place in thy affection and thy memory, <f until my nerved arm and firm soul shall " again enable me personally to reclaim my precious rights, as thy guardian and thy friend ; and, oh ! shouldst thou in “ the fond exaggeration of gratitude, or £i in the glowing partiality of friendship.

366

THE NOVICE OF

view my conduct in a more elevated light than it deserves, look on it but as the offspring of a mind which, though <c not free from the errors of humanity, has long been emancipated from the prejudices of the world, and which, in <c its moral practices or religious faith, has “ still made truth its object, and reason its " guide. *Tis at the source of the for-mer, ’tis by the beam of the latter, that fc all human virtue, all human wisdom, all <f human felicity, are to be found.

De Sorville.”

On the marriage of Henry the IVth of France with Mary de Medicis, the duke and duchess de Beauvilliers appeared for the first time since their union at the court of Paris. An adulatory and sordid world pressed round to behold the renovation of that splendor and magnificence with whose supposed extinction it had fled. Supported on one side by her illustrious husband, on the other by her guardian friend, in all the

ST. DOMINICK.

367

panoply of youth and beauty, in all the splendor of exalted rank, the blush of triumph glowing on her cheek, the flame of conscious virtue victorious over envious defamation playing in her eyes, the duchess de Beauviiliers approached the august presence of her sovereign and his royal consort, and received in return from royal graciousness the nuptial congratulation she gracefully paid.

Slander, like fire, soon becomes exhausted, in proportion to the fierceness with which it burns. The effects of that malice which the charms and genius of the countess de St. Dorval had awakened long since slumbered in oblivion ; but the homage, the admiration, they had excited, again revived with fresh ardor and popularity as she wreathed her roses round the head of the duchess de Beauviiliers, and divested them of the thorns which censure had shed amidst their beauties when they blushed on the brow of the countess de St. Dorval. Still possessing the liberality

ses

THE NOVICE OF

to encourage and reward in others those talents she so eminently possessed herself, she still appeared as the presiding deity of taste and the generous patroness of genius ; but it was of taste veiled in the decent drapery of decorum, and corrected, though not swayed, by the custom of the day in which she lived. And while she stretched out a supporting hand to virtuous merit, from the fatal connection of genius and vice she turned abhorrent and indignant. The friend of the unavoidably wretched, and the reclaimer of the self-created miserable, she had learned in her worldly noviciate to distinguish between impulse and principle; and the charities which still abundantly flowed from the benevolence of her nature were now presented to their objects by the hand of justice.

Never was there a period in the historic records of France more congenial by its political situation to the peace, the happiness of social and domestic enjoyment,

ST. DOMINICK.

369

than that when, after a three months’ residence at Paris, the duke and duchess de Beauvilliers returned to the land of their forefathers, accompanied by their inestimable friend, the chevalier de Sorville. The sword of civil war deposited with the volume of sectarian controversy on the altar of concord and religious toleration, confidence, peace, and affluence, shed their rich blessings on every side.

The laborious husbandman anticipated in full and happy security to reap the fruits of his toil, and to enjoy the produce of that grain which the devastation of civil warfare had so often blasted in the germ.

The artist and the mechanic found in the resources of their genius and their industry the reward of competency and the stimulus of applause.

The nobleman, hanging up his arms amidst the trophies of his ancestors, retired from the blood-stained field to the peaceful and dear domains of his inheri-

VOL. IV.	R

3? 0

THE NOVICE OF

tance, to exercise the patriarchal virtues in the bosom of his family, and to insinuate himself into the long-estranged hearts of his vassals and dependants.

Licentiousness banished from the army, the warrior became at once the protector and the idol of the people ; and their patriot king, released from the perplexity of political engagement and the tumult of unavailing warfare, resigned himself to the mild influence of social happiness, and bestowed on his subjects the felicity he en-joyed.

Such were the great and inestimable blessings which arose from even the temporary suspension of party faction and religious intolerance.

Such was the happy period when Imogen, in the bosom of her family, strictly fulfilling all the duties of social life, evinced that the liberal cultivation of the female mind is the best security for the virtues of the female heart ; and that the genius, the talents, and graces, of the countess de St.

ST. DOMINICK.

371

Dorval, when regulated by prudence and accompanied by good sense, were neither incompatible with the domestic qualities of the duchess de Beauvilliers, nor the meek and modest virtues of the Novice of St. Dominick.