
CHAPTER 1

To the Right Rev, ——-,

The Lord Bishop of ~™~, Palace of

Dear Bishop,

If our most serious resolutions are sometimes procrastinated, sometimes broken, may we not reasonably expect forgiveness, when occasionally found wanting in the discharge of our duties of ceremony, or engagements of etiquette ? I feel that I ought long since to have congratulated you on your advancement from your English Rectory to an Irish See. I have done it in fact; and for forms, you know how little I deal in them.

Since my arrival on my Irish estate, which I have now visited for the first time, 1 have been deeply involved in business. The renewal of old leases, reclamation of neglected rights, repair of highways, and restoration of all kinds of dilapidations, both in the house and demesne (the consequence of many years absence and neglect), together with an almost endless labour through the labyrinth of minor law transactions, exclusively incidental I believe to Irish property, have scarcely left me breathing time. So different is all this from the quiet tenor of my life at Glentworth Hall, that I scarcely know myself in my novel character of bustle and importance. However, my affairs are now nearly brought to a close, and though 1 should certainly

prefer (being once in Ireland) a longer residence at Ballynogue, to become better acquainted with my tenants on this side the water, and more effectually to study their interests; yet so anxious is Lady Singleton to be off, that I think we shall return home early in the ensuing month. Lady Single-ton, who is, as you know, a traveller by profession, wishes to return by Scotland, in preference to retracing our steps by Holyhead. I have therefore to beg a night’s lodging at your palace for myself and family, en passant, for I understand the sleeping stage within a few miles of your residence is execrably bad. But should we change our minds and not go by post.......

Dear Bishop,

Patrick, Mr. Glentworth, would have written, but I have snatched the pen from his hand, in the conviction that I shall come more

immediately to the point. I know of old, that his head is by no means bien timbre for these sorts of negotiation : there is nobody so clever as Mr Glentworth ; but, as 1 used to say to poor dear Lord Singleton, men always fail when they come to les details. Allons donc! 1 need not tell you how difficult it is to move Mr. Glentworth out of Derbyshire. During his twenty years marriage with his first wife, he never (as he boasts) slept one night away from Glentworth Hall, except white he was attending Parliament: and though Î have been constantly urging him since the day of our union to visit his Irish estates (for I heard there was every thing to do) I never could prevail upon him, until the falling in of his leases gave him no alternative, and so—here we are.

Oh, my dear Bishop, what a country 1 What room for change and improvement! or rather what a necessity

fora total bouleversement of every thing.

I have clone a little ; that is, I have undone every thing: but for the present I shall not have time to complete any thing. My plans, most of which I have drawn out myself, have quite astonished Mr. Glentworth’s Irish - agent ; but, as is usual among the semi-barbarous, improvement is resisted as innovation, and Mr. O’Grady has an obstacle to oppose to every thing I have suggested ; because the old muddling system must go on for ever in the same old muddling way.

There is nothing so much wanted here as a canal from Ballynogue to Dublin : I have drawn out a plan upon the Newcastle system, and.... But we will talk all these things over when we-meet. Now Mr. Glentworth is planté here, it is quite as difficult to get him back to England, as it was to induce him to leave it. We propose, however,, bidding farewell to Ballynogue (for



the present) on or about the 15th of September: and as we shall go slowly, for we intend to travel with a set of horses we have made up since we come here, we may expect, according to my calculations, to be with you by the 21st. We left Charles Glentworth at Oxford, with your quondam pupil, Lord Boston. Our party therefore simply consists of Mr. G. myself, my two daughters, their governess, and five servants. Apropos, of Lord •	B.	we	met	his	mother,	Lady	Llanberis, in Wales, on her way to what ] call her principality.—There never was so bored a woman ; though she talked in raptures of her “ native mountains/* when in London. They say she is journalière—but she has an excellent heart.	She expects the

Savilles at Llanberis ; they are amazing lie! What can that mean ? She talks with great delight of her son, and, considering the care you took of his edu-

cation, she might have done something better than placing you in a poor bishopric in the north of Ireland : however, this is but her pas de charge for you. She will do more and better in time, for her five boroughs must carry every thing before them. I wish, however, you had consulted me, before you accepted the See : I will not pledge myself that my brother would or could do better at present for you ; but he would have done as well pour le moins.

Farewell, my dear Bishop : we all unite in congratulations, &c.

I am just going to walk- to our little town of Ballynoge friends gotue, with a new friend of our’s, whom we found here, and who was quite, what is vulgarly called, a gad «end—a Mr. Dexter, an amazing safe person, quite of the right side, and with a quantity of good sense; he agrees with me in every thing, but particularly on the state of this wretched country: he is settled at Ballynogue, and

- if • | j I v|A I >*r

- *

<	j.	\	1	I	(

1 ‘

t I* * i * «P - f' I ^li t*	t	«	*

•	-	ï	♦	U	:

*. i.•■-«<.	.	1	».	.	*	•	.	»

»■. ... ► ••» —<

• * ♦ - * • , -*>

\ •*+■ « -* ~ *■«

^ ' 1 , -

- . .il r**	.	-	• •

To the Lady Viscountess Singleton3 Ballynogue Castle,

Ballynogue,

My dear Madam,

I return your Ladyship, Mr. Glentworth, and the Misses Singleton, my most unfeigned and hearty thanks for your kind congratulations on my unmerited promotion to the distinguished situation which I now unworthily hold. My elevation to the See

of----- took place shortly after you

left our ever by me esteemed and regretted neighbourhood in Derbyshire. The event, Lady Singleton, was unexpected, but the solicitude of my noble friends got the start of my humble desires. I trust I was contented with my former state; nor, indeed was an Irish bishoprick, with so small a revenue, and such limited patronage, an object

greatly to be covetted : but I left every thing to the Countess of Llanberis.

I must certainly rejoice in any circumstance which may bring your Ladyship and Mr. Glentworth to this remote part of the world, and the best accommodation my poor episcopal residence (by courtesy expect also called palace) can afford is at your Ladyship’s service. The house, though old, is capacious; and you may judge that I have a tolerable number of lodging rooms, when Ï inform your Ladyship, that at the time I hope to have the honour of seeing your family, I expect also, as my guests. Commodore and Lady Florence Grandville, their friend, Mr. Vandaleur, and Colonel

Percy Moclere, Lord B------*s second

son, who is quartered in my neighbourhood. Commodore Grandville (with whose oldest brother, the present Earl Grandville, I was travelling, when I first had the honour of meeting your Ladyship, and your respected late

Lord- at Florence) is stationed off Lough Swilly. He has, I hear, taken for the time being, a house prettily situated on the coast, and Lady Florence intends (as it is right she should) to spend the three ensuing months with him : she comes from her father’s near Edinburgh, and the Commodore

meets her at-----— palace, to give her

convoy to Lough Swilly.

Mr. Vandaleur, at one of whose unrivalled dinners in Portman Square I had the honour of meeting your Ladyship when I was last in town, is come over merely to see his friends the Grandvilles; and Lady Florence wrote me word she had appointed him to meet them at my place : I sincerely rejoice, therefore, that I have, something to offer your Ladyship which may serve as an inducement to you and Mr- Glentworth to remain a few days under my roof, and I hope Lady Singleton will believe that I am, with

every sentiment of respect, and the highest consideration,

Her Ladyship's servant and friend, Richard

Palace of ---e

September the 1st»

P. S. I have been sadly oppressed with my old complaint in the chest ever since I came to Ireland. The moisture of the climate is much against me ; I have, however, found relief for the present from a newly discovered

I	«/

medicine, a balsam, I have got over from London, recommended by my friend Judge • - —. I find here ample room for my little agricultural tastes, and I have a spot of ground near the palace, which I call my Pet Farm : it is, indeed, a nice thing in its way* Game is plentiful and excellent just about me; the salmon abundant and very good : but, as your Ladyship observes, there is much to do to make

things indurable. I hear but bad accounts of our friend the Archbishop. Poor Mrs. B—— ! I pity her most sincerely : if Lord —can succeed there for his friend, I wonder who would get Lincoln.

To the Right Rev,-----

The Lord Bishop of------

F ala ce of---.

Dear Bishop*

We have received your’s of the first, and thank you for your offered hospitality. I happen to know all the party you mention particularly well, and shall be glad to meet them. How Lady Florence will get on at Lough Swill y I don’t very well understand, except the officers of the Commodore’s squadron go for something ; however, her joining her husband is amazingly like her '

she professes great respect of the bien-séance, and she is quite right: it is that which precisely draws the line: I have often told her so; and entre nous, when she was doing all sorts of foolish things, a few years back, Î first gave her the hint. She has not let it lie idle, and gets on amazingly well in consequence.

Mr. Vandaleur’s goings so far from

O o

London surprizes me ; for though he always lies by at the right season, I never knew him before get so completely out of the way of the world. I should like to know his real motive for this journey to Ireland. As to his friendship for Lady Florence, that is an understood thing, to be merely a mailer de convenience on both sides. I don't at all agree with you that his dinners are good : he likes to afficher the thing, I know, beyond any man in town ; and any one may toady him, by praising his cook, Du Buisson; who, after

an \as i torn mm tne last oay i mnea with him) would at Paris he considered as a mere savant gargotier. We had an immense clemèlê about him that day. He sent up (in his menu) “ Les félets a la Bernfor the famous “ félets de bellevue^ a la Pompadour.” Now when my brother went on his first embassy, we happened to have this precise dish, dressed by the son of Mademoiselle de Pompadour’s cook ; for it was she that invented them for the fC petits appartements” at Bellevue : whereas the other was a thing quite obsolete, and invented by the famous Duchess of Berry for her father, the Regent, ages before. I have been amazingly unpopular ever since with, Mr. Vandaleur—and, indeed, I have more than once got myself into scrapes with my English friends, by setting them right on subjects, of which, from the very nature and character of the country, they must be ignorant ; for

though now and then you will find things, pretty fair at some of our best nobility houses, yet upon the whole England is, on this chapter, pretty much where it was in the days of Louis qua-torze, whose ambassador exclaimed, on his return to Paris :

“ Ah ! quel pays etrange---vingte religions, ét que deux sauces/’

You used to have a good deal of savoir about these things yourself, at least in West India cookery. 1 remember, when you were travelling with Lord Grandville, you dressed for us at Florence some pelau, which how dear Lord Singleton voted supreme!— it was not. however, strictly West In-dian; but it was a good thing in its way.

You may certainly expect us about the middle of September ; Mr. Glentworth says the 1 Sth ; I say the twentieth. Mr. Dexter lies the horses in training every day, under my inspection. We have cured, between vs, Mr.

Glentworth's favourite mare ox a dis-ease, which Thompson, as usual, denies she ever had. You know Mr. G lent-worth’s way of going on for ever with his old servants, and suffering himself to be imposed on by them. I am convinced he is afraid of Thompson. What a quiet, half-alive person the late poor Mrs. Glentworth must have been ! Charles is like neither of them: he is a most head strong boy ; his getting a curricle was quite against my consent, for he happens to know just nothing at all about driving, and will take no hints.

Adieu, my dear Bishop-—you will say I am veritable causeuse, to-day: I am, nevertheless, sincerely your's,

C. Singleton.

Sept. 4th.

Ballynogue Castle.	+

P. S. I proposed to Mr. O’Grady to enrich the soil of the demesne with marie, as we did in Derbyshire: but he

at once declined the experiment. First, because it was not adapted to this soil, and next, because, if it were, there is no marie-pit in the neighbourhood.—How Irish! If I remained here I would carry my point, however, as I should about a road which I wanted to have proposed at the next county meeting. Mr. O’Grady says it is not to be done, unless the bog, across which I want to run it (to meet the new canal we were talking of), was drained. I told him of the artificial banks in Holland, and other places, but he is entêté beyond every thing. I must say, Mr. G lent worth bears him out in all, because he is one of his Jplain, honest, straight-forward men ; which means, you know, persons who have not the ingenuity to be rogues, if they were, ever so inclined. Adieu once more—O! by the bye-—throw all your quackeries out of the window, and adopt my prescription, the simple,



my old remedy, which you may remember never failed. I long to see your Pet Farm, but if you don’t know the merits and property oi'ftorin grass, you know nothing. We shall make hay at Christmas: I only heard of it this day myself, and have not yet mentioned it to Mr. Glentworth or Mr. O’Grady. I am a great stickler for wooden shoes, instead of the horrible brogues they wear here ; I got some made, and these miserable people will not be prevailed on to adopt them. In every thing how unlike the peasantry of France and Switzerland—at least what they were.

On the afternoon of the fourteenth of September, Mr. Glentvvorth, Lady Singleton, and suite, arrived before the palace gates of the Right Rev. the Bishop of-----, almost at the same mo-

ment that Commodore and Lady Flo-

rence Grandville, Mr. Vandaleur, and Colonel Mod ere, were in the act of mounting their horses for a morning ride. While the obsequious prelate stood upon the steps of his episcopal residence, bowing out one part}7 and bowing in the other, his guests exchanged their greetings and salutations, en passant, with all the nonchalant recognition with which people of the world hail people of the world ; but somewhat enlivened by exclamations of surprise, at the remoteness of the scene in which they had met.

u Good Heavens, how extraordinary Î I should as soon have expected we should have met in the deserts of Arabia"

“ Only think of a particular set from the neighbourhood of St. James’s finding themselves accidentally re-assembled in the wilds of Ireland.”

<£ Do you know, Lady Florence* it is quite a coup du theatre, a thing for a comedy.*’

“Qra pantomime,.’5 added the Colo» nel, hi'presto popolorum! and here we are !”

“ 5Tis quite ridiculous.55 The party then separated ; the tra-sellers to repose in their apartments after the fatigue of their journey ; the loungers to pursue their morning’s amusements ; and the Bishop to extend his pastoral care over his Pet farm,

CHAPTER 2

Tiie party, thus accidentally brought together, were of that class in society vaguely designated under the general term—'people of fashion : and though no one individual was sufficiently distinguished to be placed at the head of his subdivision, yet were they all so far “ fair specimens/’ that there could be little difficulty in determining their respective places in the arrangement of notoriety.

Mr. Glentworth alone was a variety which chance had included in the general classification. He was a rich English commoner, and represented that best and most enlightened order in the population of the country, from which England, in her Augustan days, drew her statesmen, her patriot, and

her heroes; and which still, perhaps, holds her up to the rest of the world, as a nation where political liberty is best understood, and moral probity best depicted. His character firm, but mild; decided, but tranquil; was of an even temperature, remote from ail extremes. A certain indolence, interwoven with his constitution, rendered him passive, and yielding to the trivial impediments, or the petty concerns of every-day life. He ambitioned no supremacy in trifles; in essentials he admitted no influence. In these, his actions were invariably the result of his principles, and to them he adhered with a tenacity which set opposition at defiance, and left even persuasion hopeless. His life had been so prosperous, that, though prompt to relieve distress, he could scarcely be supposed to sympathise with misfortune; and so little had the varieties of human character been exhibited to his observation, that

to their finer shades he was totally insensible, and his discrimination was applied only to their extremes. The villain could not have escaped him ; tlie rascal might have gone on imposing upon him for ever; but the candid and fair, the enlightened and liberal, would at all times have attracted his attention, and challenged his respect.

Lady Singleton had been the object of bis first love, when she was young and handsome ; but lie was then a younger brother, and ambition decided against him. This lady, with all the importance, though without the title of an ambassadress, accompanied her brother Lord B. in his successive embassies to the courts of Florence, Vienna, and Paris. Poor, though wellborn, her object was to make a brilliant alliance ; and while her diplomatic brother was assisting at councils, which were to decide the fate of nations, she was, with no less exertion of political

sagacity, endeavouring to determine the destiny of Lord Viscount Singleton, a rich and highly connected nobleman, devotedly attentive to his health, which he only preserved by living abroad. Lord S. was wholly averse from the state of-matrimony, which he at last embraced, merely to rid himself of the importunities of the woman he made his wife. His properly was entailed on the male heir, and he died, leaving two daughters, and his widow inadequately provided for. During life, his health had been his only concern ; the supporting the family grandeur his only passion ; and he died true to the ' principles in which he lived. Lady Singleton was more than disappointed; she was mortified and indignant ; she thought she must have .held a paramount influence over her husband, because she believed she had married a fool, and she failed perhaps because she was right in her conjecture. While Tnr. t.	c

Lady Singleton was pursuing matrimony and politics abroad, Mr. Glentworth succeeded to twenty thousand per annum, and married at home; and when at the expiration of twenty years, both parties accidentally met, free, emancipated from the respective engagements they had formed in the interim, Lady Singleton again put her political sagacity into motion, and took into consideration the scantiness of her own jointure, and the value of Mr. G lent worth’s estates. At that age when she had been alone susceptible of preference, Mr. Glentworth had been its sole object, and interest and inclination alike combined in urging her views on the heart and hand of her quondam lover. Lady Singleton was a fine vto-man, and a diplomatist ; Mr. Glentworth was an English country gentleman, who knew no more of what is called life than was to be learned during his annual attendance on parliament : the odds were of course against him, and he lost his game, before he suspected he had been drawn in to play it.

A long sessions favored her Ladyship's political arrangements : she talked of old times till old feelings returned, with old remembrances; and till the senses and the imagination became the dupe of the memory. Time was not challenged to account for the thefts he had committed, while prepossession supplied their loss; and by the day parliament teas up, Lady Singleton went down to G lent worth Hall, as the bride of its excellent master. Dissimilar in every point of character, they yet, by a happy discordia-coticors, went on well together. Her bustle was well opposed to his quietude. Her interference sometimes amused, if it sometimes annoyed him, and her judicious attention to his habits and comforts elicited his patience for her whims, his indulgence for her follies. An only son was the fruit of his first marriage; by his second he had no issue.

The force of health, and presumption of high spirits, had given to Lady Singleton the resemblance of that energy which belongs alone to genuine talent. Habits and manners acquired in countries where woman is called upon to take a part in all the interests of society, blended with her own com-plexional activity, created for her that species of character which the French have aptly termed lc une femme affaireP Idle by circumstances, restless by disposition ; loving indolence, yet hating quiet, she was officious without being useful, and busy without being occupied ; always struggling for authority, Sue spoke only to dictate, and moved only to middle, while in hevfuror for influence, she had not the tact to dis-Crr i whether attrition » r neglect follow -d hef c.uncrs, or waited on her

orders : to obvious contradiction, however, she was in temperately alive ; and to obsequious flattery weakly susceptible : easy to dupe, but difficult to convince^ she was sought for by the cunning, and avoided by the ivise, gay, dissipated, and amusing: the giddy, the frivolous, and the inconséquente, always found their account in her society ; and her foreign connexions, knowledge of the world, and more than all else, the immense size other house in town, gave her a distinguished place in the circle of fashion. One eminent person in a family, generally, not universally, produces a proportionate degree of mediocrity on the succeeding members. Extraordinary clever mothers do not always produce extraordinary clever daughters: without pausing to seek this effect in its cause,, or to produce a second instance to substantiate the position, it is certain that the Honorable Miss Caroline, c 3

and Miss Horatia Singleton, were as vapid and as dull as their mamma was animated and sagacious. Destitute of common intelligence, and yet over-burthened with accomplishments, and old enough to take their parts in society, among the corps du ballet of exhibited young ladies, they were still kept in the back-ground, on some principle, which maternal wisdom had not chosen to divulge to them ; and to this wisdom, which was feared without being respected, they bowed implicitly, not submissive, but not resigned.

The Honorable Mrs. Singleton belonged to a large class of young ladies to be found in almost all societies, and who have for their prototype that intelligent young lady of other times, who wrote to the Spectator to know if “ dimple** was spelled with two p—s. The minds of the Misses Singletons had never elaborated a query more important, nor admitted a doubt more ab-

stracted. No lowly consciousness, however, of their own unimportance disturbed the confidence of their self-sufficiency. Dull and giddy, conceited and flippant, they sneered, winked, and whispered .to each other their mutual contempt of all who were excluded from their own little mysteries ; of all whom they had been taught to regard as informed, or to laugh at as quizzical. But the person whom they held in the most thorough contempt, was their governess, by whom, however, it must be confessed, though they were sometimes entertained, they were seldom instructed ; for passiveness, and seeming inanity, with some other prominent points in her character, which were favourable to their turn for a sort of maudlin ridicule, rendered her the perpetual object of their derision : alone with them in their study, their attempts if ever felt, were never replied c 4*

to ; but when in the presence of others they endeavoured to throw off their “ pretty wit,” at iier expence, she had the art, or the artlessness, it was impossible to say which, by some unexpected look or word, to throw them into situations ludicrous beyond their power to extricate themselves ; and then the}' wondered how a person mamma called “ bête ” should blunder upon such things, and make them feci so uncomfortable : still, however, they did not complain, lest they should get somebody in her place, less indulgent, less facile, and (as they expressed it) less quizzical than herself.

This governess, half Irish, half foreign, passing the first fourteen years of her life in Ireland, and the last ten in Italy, was the only person who had ever retained the situation in Lady Singleton’s family beyond the first six months : she had now held it nearly a

year, and stood indebted for the circumstance, not to her merits, but her deficiencies.

When Lady Singleton was engaging her, a few weeks after her arrival in England, she observed—that she did not want a governess to meddle with the education of her daughters, further than as she directed ; that she did not particularly desire to bring into her family une illustre malheureuse, blessed with fine talents, and superfine feelings ; nor did she require a governess to out-dress herself and her daughters ; to play the agreeable, and to make one in her societies. To every clause of these stipulations a most implicit obedience had been observed by the submissive duenna. “In short, Miss CLHalloran,” continued her Ladyship, “ my daughters do not now want a governess so much as a companion ; and my object in engaging you, is, that I am told you speak f La lingua Toscana, nel

C 6

bocca Romana ;* not that I quite think so myself, for your U is French; however, I know nobody that speaks it better, and therefore I take you ; and par consequence, we must have nothing but Italian; French always goes on, one does not know how ; but observe, we must have none of your Doric English; for your brogue is as pure as if you only left Ireland yesterday ; as indeed has always been the case with every Irish person I ever met on the Continent/'

Miss O'Halloran had not hitherto in any one instance violated this treaty, and the result of her docility and implicit obedience was that Lady Singleton said she was c bête? and the young ladies believed it.

Though all governesses are interesting, by presumptive right, yet Miss OTialloran had so wholly neglected her privilege, that Lady Singleton and her daughters had as little to fear from

her attractions, as to expect from her resistance : she had, however, a youthfulness of appearance, which is sometimes deemed beauty in itself: but this juvenile air was counteracted by an inertness and indolence of motion, which is deemed peculiar to senility.

• The abruptness of her manner, might perhaps, under the influence of prepossession, have passed for naïveté, had it not always been followed by a certain vacancy of countenance, which changed the promised charm into an actual defect, while her smiles, which were 4 few, and far between/ alone threw a ray of intelligence over her features, and seemed to struggle with their own acuteness, lest they should shame the stupor of her vacant eye. Either from a sense of her situation, or from natural gravity, the most arduous of all others, her conduct was distinguished by a reserve almost amounting to sullenness, and yet she had the habit of

bursting into an abrupt laugh, whenever circumstances called upon her risible faculties : this she did, ‘ not wisely^ but too wellfor her laugh, though always ill-timed, was ever well directed. Lady Singleton had in vain contended against this obedience to a natural impulse; but as nature was still more powerful even than her Ladyship, and as this was evidently a fault beyond the reach of art, Lady Singleton contented herself by telling every one who witnessed the incorrigible propensity, that the girl was rieuse par co?istitutio?i, but as she had no other fault to find with her, she thought it a pity to. part with her for that: for the rest, Miss O’Halloran was a mere dead letter in the splendid volume of society with which she was accidentally bound up : she has only obtained her place in this catalogue raisonec3 from the accident of her association.

Commodore the Honorable Angus-

tus GrandviUe, was a brave, thoughtless, good-natured, sea-officer, destitute of domestic feelings, and consequently averse from domestic habits ; admiring his wife as a fine woman (for which reason he had married her), and confiding in her as a heartless one : he knew her cold, and believed her prudent : he loved his only son passion-atety, because he had nothing else to love ; and being almost always on service, he considered his ship as his home ; and on shore, felt himself only a visitor.

Lady Florence Grandville was a woman of fashion by etat, an observer of the decencies by profession, and, a coquette by every charter-right and privilege with which nature, circumstances, and education could endow her : like the glowworm, shining without heat, at once vain and insensible, she* was not to be misled by fancy, noreommitted by passion ; a wife and a mother, she was

attentive without being affectionate, and only gave to her family what the superfluities of self-gratification could spare from their own abundance. With some reputation for being brilliant, or at least attractive in conversation, she had in fact but just sufficient intelligence to lead her to the means bv which her own views could be best effected; and she had early discovered the secret of purchasing, by 'Well-directed bribes to the vanity of others, that distinction indispensably necessary to her own. The men who followed her were unconscious of the lure which led them, and knew not that they were less drawn on by the admiration they felt for her, than by the self-love flattered in themselves.

A French philosopher, in a metaphysical work (and a French philosopher only would think of mingling iove with metaphysics), has declared a platonic love to be the only love for a rich

désœuvré ; and a coquette the only mistress—“ Et pour ce dernier, un coquette est une maîtresse délicieuse ” he observes.* Tried by this rule, Lady Florence Grandviile was the person in the world to be the platonic friend of Mr. Vandaleur : such in fact she was, to the letter of the word.

Mr. Vandaleur was English by birth and education, Dutch by descent, dull by nature, rich by inheritance, and gallant by assumption. Labouring under the embarrassment of his opulence, which no extravagance of youth or of passion had decreased, he sought to extricate himself from his difficulties by a boundless indulgence in his

* La plus forte passion de la coquetterie est d’etre adoreé, que faire a cette effet, toujours irriter les passions des hommes, sacs jamais les satisfaire.

Helyetius.

dominant propensity. Gourmand by habit, lie became by principle,

“ Un veritable Amphitryon and the science of his dinners obtained him a notoriety in London, where such science, though not promoted to the dignity of a professâtship, boasts disciples as numerous and distinguished as any in the range of human acquirement. It also obtained for him the notice of Lady Florence Crandville, whose bon-ton gave the finish to his rising fashion; and who admitted him into the legion of her “thousand and one’' friends, on the merits of his 66 coteleties and “ fiiets/’ Time, habit, and an unsuccessful winter’s campaign, favored his promotion : from being un 4f amant de parade,” he became a friend by profession. Thus associated by idleness and vanity, who- *

* Lc veritable Amphitryon Et P Amphitryon ou Pou dine.

Moliirs.

ever could have given occupation to the one, or sensibility to the other, would have destroyed all grounds of connexion in both for ever: meantime, Lady Florence afforded him her attention, without according him her prefer-encej and he continued to follow in a •kind of blind but tranquil devotion, which passion had never disturbed, nor love exalted : at once, the most obsequious and most indifferent of men.

The Honorable Colonel Percy Moclere was a young man upon town, whom every body knew. To give some little distinction to a character which naturally had none, he affected to profess in perfection that subordinate and innocent, but tiresome branch of ridicule, called quizzing; and as some excellence in that art can be worked out of the smallest possible quantity of ideas which can go to the formation of a human mind, there was no insuperable bar to the success of his attempts.

Such was the party which a six o’clock dinner-bell summoned, and reunited at the well-furnished table of the Bishop.

The soups and fish were scarcely removed, and something like conversation was beginning to circulate, by Lady Singleton’s attacking Mr. Vandaleur on the subject of his cook’s want of science in the important articles of filets, when one of Mr. Glentvvorth’s servants approached her Ladyship, and delivered her some message, in a low voice. “ O, very well,” she replied : “ Edwards, go and see if you can be of any assistance to Mr. Dexter: tell him dinner has been served some time then turning to the Bishop, she added, “ O, my dear Bishop, I entirely forgot to mention that our friend Mr. Dexter accompanies us, and that 1 must beg you will extend your hospitality to him.”

The Bishop returned a neat and ap-

propria te speech, expressive of the pleasure he must feel in receiving any friend of her Ladyship’s; and Lady Singleton continued, interruptingsomething that Mr. Glentworth intended to say:

Cf O, Lean assure you, Bishop, you will like Mr. Dexter of all things: he is an extremely sensible and obliging person, of the right way of thinking, and plays all sorts of games. He offered to accompany us as far as Do-naghadee, merety to be of use to us on the road; for he says ’tis impossible for strangers to guard against imposition on Irish roads, except one has been long resident in the country, which is his case; and he knows exactly how to deal with them. He is our purse-bearer; but, farther than that, lam pretty equal myself to all the exigencies of a journey in any^country.”

Mr. Glentworth smiled, and said:

64 I am sure, my dear, I wish that in

the present instance you had extended your confidence in your own abilities, and not have taken advantage of Mr. Dexter’s civil and accommodating disposition. I protested from the first starting of the project against bringing a man such a distance, merely to be of use to us, when it must undoubtedly be of great inconvenience to himself.”

“ O! but then, my dear Mr. Glent-worth, you know you oppose every scheme in the first blush of its proposal.”

“ But where has this gallant convoy been detained,” asked Lady Florence* “ that he has suffered his charge to come on without his protection ?”

“ Why,” said Lady Singleton, “ he was so obliging as to ride back to the last stage, for a very valuable paper which I left behind me, in my ridicule; a draught of the plan and elevation of an aqueduct for Ballynogue, and a

drawing of my Lancasterian school-houses.M

44 Does this Mr, Dexter live in the world ?” asked Lady Florence.

Before the question could be answered, the subject of the conversation entered, with an air more of effrontery than of ease. He was a spruce, smart, dapper person, and received the Bishop's welcome with a jerking bow, as obsequious as it was inelegant.

44 Here, Mr. Dexter/’ cried Lady Singleton, 44 here is a seat, between Lady Florence Grandville and I.”

Mr. Dexter smirked and smiled, and - wriggled to his chair; then rose, and bowed profoundly, as he received the honor of presentation to his noble and distinguished neighbour; and while his soup was preparing at the sideboard, he pn seated Lady Singleton’s ridicule, observing, in an affected tone of voice: 44 I have had the good fortune tore-cover your Ladyship’s valuable—-or

indeed I should say, invaluable, drawings; not, however, till 1 had recourse to some little artifice, when threats failed ; for after all, you must ever meet the lower Irish with their own cunning-—I know them well; and I am sure your La'ship would be much amused, if you knew the little stratagem I had recourse to.”

“ Politique aux choux et aux raves, Eh! Mr. Dexter?” said Lady Single-ton, laughing critically.

“ Lady Singleton,’* said Mr. Dexter, with the air of one who really understood what she said--------

c' Well, but do let us hear, Mr. Dex-ter: I should like amazingly to know what use they could make of such drawings.”

“ That is exactly what I said. Ma'am, to the innkeeper; and to tell the truth, the moment I saw the sign of

St. Patrick over his door, I--------but

oh ! Lady Singleton, such an affecting

sight as I beheld since! !—the state of this country is too deplorable. A poor old woman, scarcely able to crawl!— such a venerable countenance too! seated weeping on the side of a ditch. I alighted, and inquired into the cause of her affliction, offering to carry her behind me to the next village. Poor soul! her little story was short and sad. She had been stopped, and ill-treated, and robbed, by a rebel”*

“ A rebelV’ repeated the Bishop: st God bless me !”

“ Yes, my Lord, a rebel. The wretch took from her her little tobacco, and her poor snuff-box ; what further he would have done, 1 will not presume to say, but that I appeared in view. Government, it must be owned, are

* In some of the Dublin prints, this is a general epithet for all sorts of criminals. A few days previous to the writing of this note, it appeared in a morning paper, that a rebel had fired at a soldier ; but happily the rebel missed his aim.

obstinately lenient, and strangely blind to the internal state of this unhappy country. The lower orders are ripe, at. this moment, for rebellion ; and even the public roads are unsafe, except one goes in a kind of caravan, as I may

sav.”

«/

“ Well, I must confess,” observed Mr. Glentworth, that I do not agree with you, Mr. Dexter, in this instance. The common people, about and on my estate, seem thinking of any thing, poor people,but rebellion; and as’for the roads we have lately passed through, i thinkl would ride back alone, as tar as we have come, without the smallest apprehension.M

“ I can very well understand, Mr. Glentworth, that you do not, and indeed ought not, to agree with me on this subject; for you must, and ought, naturally to judge of the rest of the country by your own flourishing estate, and your town of Ballynogue (for 1 may well

call it your's), where, by vour extraordinary liberality and benevolence to your tenants, and the unexampled activity and spirit of reform which my Lady Singleton has—-------”

“ Nay, we must cry for quarter, Mr. Dexter*” interrupted Mr. Glent-worth, laughing.

“ 1 believe, however,’5 said the Bishop, “ Mr. Dexter is quite right, generally speaking, with respect to the real state of this country: for a clergyman in my diocese gives pretty much the same account ; and he has some right to know, for he acts in his district and parish in the three capacities, civil, military, and clerical.”

“ My Lord, I am highly flattered by your Lordship’s condescension in agreeing with me upon any subject: and after all, who better than your Lordship should know the real state of things in this unfortunate country: particularly that part of it in which

vnr t.	vi

your Lordship holds so distinguished and so sacred a situation ? But I must bo permitted to sav, Mr. Glentworth, that all great English landholders have not your confidence on first coming to this country: indeed, so much the contrary, that a young gentleman, a friend of mine, who has an immensely fine estate in Leinster, and who for the first time came from England to visit it last summer, had the precaution to apply in Dublin for a guard of soldiers to protect him on the journey, Strange, however, to say, he was refused, and he had then recourse to a simpler means of protection; he engaged a celebrated piper, and made him play the whole way before him in the Dicky-hox,^ wishing to try concilia-

* This anecdote, too absurd for fiction to venture at, I have on the authority of some per» sons of distinction, who were in tho neighbour* hood of this u conciliatory gentleman’s estate^

mou, and being well aware that the lower Irish are addicted to music, and

those sort of idle things-*-and----- ■.*'*

Here Mr* Defter was interrupted by Mm O’Halloran’s bursting into a vio» lent fit of laughter, in which she was joined ' by every one at table, except Lady Singleton ; for Mr* Dexter, not to be discountenanced by any event, joined the laughers himself, until, ob* serving the displeasure of Lady Single* ton’s countenance, he abruptly com* posed \m own, and with great gravity asked her to take wine,

Lady Singleton threw a look at her governess, and murmured çç bête ï’* while Mr* Glentworth endeavoured to give another turn to the conversation ; and Mr, Dexter addressed himself to Lady Florence, who, though she af* fected to give him a flattering and un*

when he arrived with his piper* The event re* êent, and the gentleman a native of this cQuntiy*

.divided attention, threw a sly glance of quizzing intelligence at the Colonel, who was only waiting for his moment.

Meantime Mr. Yandaleur had stood up to dress his sallad at the sideboard, calling for trenchers and wooden spoons, and accusing the Bishop of being not orthodox, because he profaned his endive and cos with china and plate.

When the ladies withdrew, Mr. Dexter and the Bishop again renewed the subject of Irish affairs; for the Bishop was a timid man, and Mr. Dexter soon discovered that he was so. As far as Mr. Dexter stood himself related, or in any way connected with Ireland, it is sufficient to say, that he lived by the country he reviled, like the wild and noxious weed that preys on the stately rum, out of which it draws its existence.

The gentlemen broke up early: the Commodore accompanied Mr, Dexter to thestable, behaving told Mr. Glent-

worth that he would just take a peep at his favorite mare before she was done up for the night. The rest of the gentlemen proceeded to the drawingroom.

ts I wonder who this quiz of a person is/5 said the Colonel, addressing Mr. Yandaleur, “ that Lady Singleton' has picked up ?”

“ I don’t know at all/5 yawned Mr. Vandaleur; “ but I rather patronize any one who makes the frais of conversation, after dinner, and saves one the trouble of talking. Ï have a system, that silence aids digestion.” u Pray, Mr. G lent worth,” said the Bishop, “ is Mr. Dexter an Irishman ?”

“ I have not the least idea, Bishop— Lady Singleton can tell you more of him than I can : my acquaintance with him was quite accidental. . Ridinginto Ballynogue one day, my whip broke in the market-place :	a	gentleman

d 3

JJCiCCI/ÜJ” il, OlCpjJCU	UUCICII UlO

his, and insisted on taking mine to mend* The next day hé called at the Castle with it. Wc asked him to dinner,, and-^here he is. Lady S* has found him extremely useful, and goodnatured* He has kept our table in game, and been very attentive to a 'mare of mine, whom he cured of a vice, which, indeed, I never suspected she had, till Mr* Dexter found it out* I understand he is a man of small but independent fortune, and has accepted an appointment in the revenue, in our district, merely to have something to do”

c* Upon my word,*' said the Bishop, 'c he appears to me to be a very sensi-ble, intelligent young man, and of a Very right way of thinking.”

“ Indeed I believe he is,” returned Mr. Glentvvorth, smiling; “ and I have but one fault to rind with him* that he makes his responses so loud at

our littie church at Ballynogue, that he puH out the clerk, and disturbs the whole congregation/5 The gentlemen had now reached the drawing-room, and coffee was served. Shortly after the bell rung for evening prayers ? but no one followed his Lordship to the chapel, but Mr. Dexter, and (by Lady Singleton’s de» sire) the Misses Singleton and their governess»

CHAPTER 3

Not many years back, the few En-glish persons of rank or consideration, who visited Ireland, came only on the imperious call of business ; and probably considered their journey as a mere pilgrimage of necessity to the shrine of interest. Ireland, once interesting for her struggles and her sufferings, and distinguished by a fatal pre-eminence in the enormities of which it was the scene, had, within the limits of little more than half a century, sunk under the sullen torpor of unresisted oppression, of unrefuted obloquy. Silence and oblivion hung upon her destiny*,

* Those historians who have brought the history of Great Britain down-to the present rcignj-

and in the memory of other nations she seemed to hold no place; but the first bolt which was knocked off her chain roused her from paralysis, and as link fell after link, her faculties strengthened, hér powers revived: she gradually rose upon the political horizon of Europe, like her own star brightening in the west, and lifting its light above the fogs, vapours, and clouds, which obscured its lustre. The traveller now “ beheld her from afar/’ and her shores, once so devoutly pressed by the learned, the pious, and the bravé, again ex-

hare, in fact, given no history of Irish affairs during the period which occurred from the revolution to the death of George II. and it is-a melancholy fact, that, from the enactment of the Penal Laws till the first dawning prospect of their repeal, the u bulk of the people ceased not only, to improve, but retrogaded ; they contracted habits of inertness for want of object to act, and lived or died as water-cresses and wild voots were plentiful or scarce.”

» 6

hibifced the welcome track of the stfan* ger*s foot. The natural beauties of the land were again explored and discover» ed, and taste and science found the re* Ward of their enterprize and labours in ti country long depicted as savage, be» sause it had long been exposed to de* solation and neglect.

When the English travellers, who were now thus assembled, had been induced to visit Ireland by the neces* sity of their various and respective in* fcerests3 they had taken pleasure into the account, no further than as it is implied in change of place. A trifling event, however, awakened curiosity, and gave birth to the unforeseen in* tention of visiting a spot still more ce« lebrated than known, and of varying a journey of obligation by the episode of ft party of mere amusement.

The Bishop had prevailed on hie friends to remain a day or two longer «t the palace than they had originally

intended. On the evening of the second day, as the whole party stood taking their coffee round the drawing-room with the exception of the young iadies and theirgoverness, Lady Single» ton exclaimed

“ Oh, apropos to nothing at all,

. Lady Florence, do you mean to visit the Giant’s Causeway before you leave Ireland ?”

“ I have never thought of it at all,5’ said Lady Florence, 11 further than that Î know there is such a thing to be seen in this part of the world/*

Miss O’Halloran/’ continued Lady Singleton, who is always pokirg her head where no one else would ever think of going, got into a Sort of old diocesan library, somewhere adjoining the palace. Is there not such a place. Bishop

Rt There is a sad old ruin, with a few books in it,” returned the Bishop, 15 which was a diocesan library/*

44 Well ; there she found some extravagant description of the Giant’s Causeway, and a3 she takes every thing au pied de la lettre, she has talked so much of its wonders to the girls (albeit unused to the talking mood)_, that they have been reading it to me while I dressed, and they are not a little amused at her believing such stuff# : what is still more odd, she hag^ told them a parcel of Irish stories, which account for the Causeway, by suppos-

The first account published of the Giant’s Causeway; towards the end of the seventeenth century, is extremely wild and improbable, and was most probably the tract in question.

One of the old names of the Giant’s Causeway was, Uinguthan, the Giant’s Cape. Fin-mac-Cumhal, the hero of Irish fable, was supposed (and is still supposed by the country people) to have been the architect of this stupendous edi&cc,-as the Basaltar region of Iceland arc attributed by the natives to their Giants-^44 the Sons of TVost,” of the Edda,

îng it the work of giants, especially of one Fin-ma-corl, I think she calls him; however, poor Miss O’iialloran’s nonsense apart, one thing is evidently pretty plain, namely, that the person who has written on the subject, and it is an amazing oid tract, knows nothing about it; and that he has never seen Mount Ætna nor Mount Vesuvius, nor in the least understands the nature of those kind of things—of which I happen to know a little.

44 Suppose, my dear/5 said Mr. Glent-worth, dryly, “ that you were to visit it yourself: you might, perhaps, give us some new theory of the phenomenon.3 5

I am sure there is no reason why we should not visit it/’ said Lady Singleton : 44 we are not pressed for time.—What do you say, Lady Florence ; shall we make a party ?’3

Lady Florence, who was flirting in an under voice with Colonel Modéré,

came eagerly toward at this proposal ; for one more perfectly accordant to her wishes could not* under existing cir* dimstances, be made» In the first instance she loved parties of pleasure* as all persons of fashion do; in the second she considered that all time passed in Ireland would go into the account of her conjugal duty* and that all time stolen from the solitudes of Lough Swilly was so much rescued from tedium and ennui. Her Ladyship*there* fore* seconded the motion with great Warmth; and the question being gene* rally put* was carried without a dis* sentient voice; the Commodore closing the agreement* by asking them all to proceed from the Giant’s Causeway to Lough Swilly, where* he said, he had rooms enough to lodge them, and ship beef and sea biscuits sufficient to victual a regiment during a month’s

O	O

siege :	he	was,	however, himself

obliged to return to his station on the

following day* Lady Florence having pressed his invitation more decidedly* the whole scheme was concluded upon with all the promptitude and facility peculiar to persons who have nothing to do but to seek amusement, and no way of obtaining it but-by change of sensa* tion and novelty of pursuit.

Every one was gratified by a scheme, of which* the moment before it was formally proposed, nobody had dreamed*

Mr* Glentvvorth, who trifled occa* sionally, with natural science, felt a laudable curiosity* and anticipated sa» tisfaction in visiting one of the most magnificent phenomena in the natu* ral world. The Colonel gave his voice to the question, with an intelligent look at Lady Florence. Mr. Vanda» leur inquired what fish the coast was famous for; and Mr. Dexter rubbed Ills hands, smirked, wriggled, and talk*

ed to the Commodore of Lord Nelson., the wooden walls of old England, and the many snug situations which a man, who had interest, might obtain in the Admiralty. But Lady Singleton, above any other individual^ was placed' in her own sphere by this arrangement: she objected to every plan proposed, to every hint suggested relative to their plans of progress. Her experience as a traveller gave her some undisputed importance oir the occasion, and her decided tone of dictation set all opposition to her will at defiance. The Bishop’s little study was ransacked for maps, gazetteers, and geographical grammars, and she at once decided on making a circuitous tour by the coast, because somebody else had proposed making the journey shorter by avoiding it. As it was Lady Florence and Mr. Dexter’s interest to prolong the journey., they warmly agreed with Lady

Singleton ; and as it was n matter of indifference to every one else, she carried her point without dissention.

44 But where is Miss O’Halloran and the girls?” asked Mr. Glentworth : “ they must be called into our councils, since they have been the origin of

our-----”

44 Nonsense!” said Lady Singleton : “ you know, Mr. Glentworth, I don't want the girls to come forward in any possible way ; and as for poor Miss O'Halloran, the idea of making her a ‘party is rather too ridiculous.”

44 O, by the bye,” said Lady Flo^. rence, “ do you know, I think she is an amazing odd person, Lady Single-ton—I do indeed ; she looks so strange, and her laugh yesterday—altogether, I never saw any thing so outré in my life.”

46 So she is,” said the Colonel; “ a regular genius I dare say—eh, Lady Singleton ?”

4i À genius!** said Lad}' Singleton.

“ No, thank heaven, she is not quite So had as that: on the contrary, she is tant soit peu niaise, for I know not of any English term which would express the sort of foolish stupidity she at times exhibits.0

Exactly,” observed Mr* Dexter, emphatically»

14 What is very extraordinary, however,J> continued Lady Singleton, ** her Italian is extremely pure, and indeed it is the only language she can speak, and the only thing for which Î engaged her» Her father was an odd kind of genius ; an Irish artist, settled at Florence.—He died in great distress there, and this girl was taken by Lady Hewson as a governess» Sir Harry was then Envoy at Florence» Now, you know, poor dear Lad 3^ Hewson is come from the menu peuple, and is upon the whole the vulgarest fine Ladj^; so her recommendation did not go for much»

The girl was a mere buffet in the fa® mily, and, I believe, kept more for the amusement than for the instruction of their affected daughter* who is a com* plete petite maîtresse) and a most tire* some little creature, with her acconi-plishments, trading upon one song, and making “ improntlüs a loisir.’* Well* Miss Corrinna Hew son married, you know, last spring, and the buffa, with her Lingua Toscana, fell to my share» She has some relations in Dublin,whom we allowed her to visit when we were at Ballynogue Castle, and she came back with a worse brogue than ever.’* Precisely,” said Mr. Dexter.

“ O !• then/’ cried the Colonel* “ I beseech you* my dear Lady Singleton, let us have a little of her brogue and her buffa : only conceive. Lady Flo® rence, what a melange. I certainty must make a better acquaintance with this Signora Katty Flanagan.”

u Well,” returned Ladv Single tun,

<l don t carry the thing too far, and amuse yourself if you will. If you can get her on the chapter of the Irish Giants, you *11 find her amusing enough, at least the girls say so ; but she never ventures to shew off before me.”

During this conversation, the ladies, the Colonel, and Mr. Dexter, formed a little coterie, apart; and while they were still talking, tea, the young ladies* and their governess, all made their appearance together. The Colonel, with his glass at his eye, followed Miss CFHalloran’s lounging motions as she proceeded up the room to the tea-table, where she took her seat ex-officio : the Colonel repeating as he watched her, to Lady Florence:—

“ Monstrous outré; one sometimes sees very good arrangements in that line:	1	dare	say	she	is	an	authoress,

writes ‘ Lectures on various subjects for young Ladies/ and illustrates the bible alphabetically, with the addition of

wood-cuts, abridges Buffon, and explains c Mann’s catechism ” *

44 Come and talk to her/’ said Lady Florence; and they proceeded towards th.e tea-table, where the Misses Single-tons stood linked arm in arm,

44 Like to a double cherry seeming parted, Sut yet a union in partition,”

whispering and smiling at the gaucherie of their governess, and throwing their eyes from the Colonel to Mr, Dexter, and from Mr. Dexter to the Colonel.

“ O, Miss Q’Halioran,5’ said Lady Florence, 64 Lady Singleton has been doing the honors by your descriptive powers: she-has set us all longing to hear your account of the Giant's Causeway.”

tf 1 beseech you, Miss G’Halloran/5 added tile Colonel, 44 i beseecli you to indulge our longings; 4 let us not burst in ignorance

u Come* Miss O’Halloran/* said Lady Singleton, dictatorial]}', “ you may once in a way faire l'agreabk/* Miss Q’Halloran will be too happy to obey your Ladyship, I am sure/* said Mr, Dexter, 44 Courage, Miss O’Halloran 5 there are none bye but friends/5

44 Or if/* continued the Colonel, i( the Muse of Eirin be impropitious to our vows, would Miss O’Halloran but invoke the Musé of the Amo in our fa* vor, and we would give up Lin-ma* cor! willingly for 4 La Yirgenella/ or 4 the Nina/ By the bye, Miss Q’Hab Joran’s countenance is finely adapted for the 4 Nina Pagga per amove / Ï have net a doubt hut she would, rival Lady Hamilton in it. Miss OsHaL Jorai/s air has something naturally egari^thd.t loose simple dress too, and that downcast eye/*

Miss O’Hallorau, who, during the whole of this attack, had gone on

quietly rlneing the cups, and arranging the tea*table, now suddenly raised her head, and opened two large eyes on the Colonel with a look of such stupid amazement, that he involuntarily start-* ed back, and a general laugh at his expence.disturbed for the moment at least the vein of his humor,

“ So,'1 said Lady Singleton, vexed that any command of her’s should be disobeyed, militate as it might against all former and general orders—54 so,the eld proverbs are always right ï

i% Leg grands talents ge font prier,**

45 Critically/* returned Mr. Dexter, who always translated hep Ladyship’s French by the context of her looks,

44 We have had quite enough, how* ever, of this nonsensecontinued La* dy Singleton, 45 Pray get on with the tea. Miss O’Halloran, Come^ Mr, Dexter, bring me that spider-table, and those maps. Very well—now cut

this pencil—and some letter-paper, if you please. Bishop, ï beg a book of the roads. And now observe, good people, 1 am prima donna upon this occasion, or I am nothing. Either you give up the arrangement of the whole tour to me, or, Je in en tiens quitte de tout—1 cut dead.”

It was agreed nem con, that her Ladyship should have ail the superintendence of the journey, while the rest should enjoy all the pleasure it afforded. Mr. Glentworth alone smiled, and remained silent. The Governess retired, as soon as her office was over, and the young ladies took their station at the back of their mamma’s chair, looking over her shoulder, as she pursued her route upon paper, while Mr. Dexter stood obsequiously cutting her pencils, and occasionally making comical faces for the young ladies, who thought him the most amusing person in the world ; but always drawing up his features into

looks of profound gravity, whenever Lady Singleton raised her eyes.

44 I am afraid,” said Mr. Glentworlli, 44 that poor Miss O’Halloran’s feelings have been rather put to the test this evening ; for without being particularly sensitive, or quick sighted, she must .have perceived that you were ail quizzing her unmercifully.”

44 Nonsense !” said Lady Singleton : 44 1 like the idea of her being sensitive. Mr. Dexter, look out in the Gazetteer for Glenarm.”

, 44 1 don't at all think," said the Colonel, 44 that she took my little gallantries amiss."

44 Here it is, Lady Singleton—Glen-

? ?

arm.

44 On the contrary. Colonel, she could not fail to be very much flattered by your notice ; and indeed, from the little I know of her, I think I can assert that she was so."

44 I would not hurt her feelings for

VOL. I.	JS

a thousand worlds,*’ said Lady Florence; 44 but she strikes me to be rather sullen than sensitive.*.*

44 Exactly, Lady Florence,” returned Mr. Dexter ; 44 that is what I say : but she is a most fortunate young woman to be where she is : and that she should refuse to obey any command imposed by Lady Singleton, is a little strange/* 44 Yes,’* said Lady Singleton, 44 I think it is rather good, my Governess refusing to do what I ask her.**

f4 Nay, my dear/* said Mr. GJent-worth, 44 she did not refuse; but the fact is, request followed request so Vapidly, that she had not time allowed her to comply or to refuse. Observe, she was called on, in a breath, for an exhibition of her descriptive powers, and for a scene from the comic and serious opera.’*

44 Certainly, Mr. Glentworth,** said Mr. Dexter, 44 what you say is perfectly just. She had not time to com-

ply or to refuse; but, as her La ship observes, she ought not to have refused implicit obedience to her La’ship’s commands. ”	$

ct Now, Mr. Dexter,said Lady Florence, throwing a rallying glance at the Colonel, <c do you pretend to say that you would not refuse to obey any order Lady Singleton should impose, however irksome it might be?”

“ 1 beg your Ladyship’s pardon ; but I must premise, that no order of my Lady SingletouV could possibly appear irksome to me. But granting it were so, my obedience would be equally prompt: nor indeed, would your Ladyship condescend to impose a command, would you find me slow t@ execute it.”

6C Then I have one ready for yo$, Mr. Dexter. Here is a broken bon* bonniere. Do ride over to the next town, and get it mended for me.”

». 2,

“ Lady Florence,, I will have the

honor of mending it myself. I have a

pretty little mechanical turn : it is just

in my way. Besides, getting such a

thing done in an Irish country town—

ha, ha, ha! I cannot refrain from

laughing. But you would not get

such a neat little job done in any town

in Ireland, except indeed Mr. Glent-

worth’s town of Ballynogue; for I

may call it his, since his extraordinary

liberalitv and benevolence to his te-%/

nants, and the unexampled activity

and spirit of my Lady Singleton-----

“ But I must have it immediately, Mr. Dexter—I must indeed. You know 1 am dying of a cold, and only live from lozenge to lozenge

t£ If these are your Ladyship’s dying

looks, what------ but you may depend

upon my zeal and dispatch ; for when engaged in the service of the ladies, as the Poet says-----”

“ Which of the poets ?” interrupted the Colonel : “ Major, or Minor, ?dr. Dexter.”

“ Which of the poets? Ha, ha, ha! very good, Colonel, very good. I hope, Lady Florence, you like poetry ; and, above ail, that you admire the celebrated Shakespear, a charming writer. That sweet little passage you may remember: hem—it begins so:

44 She sat like Patience on a-”

44 Mr. Dexter/’ cried Lady' Single-ton, 44 do lav a chess-board for the Bishop and Mr. Glentworth. My dear Mr. Glentworth, had you not better attack the Bishop at something ? 1 cannot imagine how people can go on for ever, lounging about. I think, young ladies, you may as well wish us good night/*

Mr. Dexter, and the young ladies, equally obedient, complied with their respective orders. The Bishop and

Mr. G lent worth took their seats at tfra chess-board, at which they were old ’ competitors. Mr. Vandaleur, who had been slumbering on a sofa for a good digestion, was challenged to vingt-un by the Commodore, who had returned from answering some official dispatches : and while Mr, Dexter sat by Lady Singleton, cutting pencils, pointing compasses, and displaying maps, the Colonel and Lady Florence took possession of a couch, and amused themselves by quizzing the whole party.

Devoid alike of that perception which rapidly developes the peculiarities of character, as of that humour which aptly exhibits them, their remarks went no further than the surface of manner ; •and their ridicule, lighting only on some little peculiarity or folly, differing from their own, without being inferior to it, was as destitute of the wit, which lends its excuse to sarcasm, as of the playfulness which deprives it of its

N » •

CHAPTER 4

Tue necessary arrangements for the tour to the Giant’s Causeway, and from thence to the Commodore’s residence on tiie siiores of Lough Swilly, were at last finally made, under the sole superintendence of Lady Singleton. Mr. Gleutworth, Mr. Yandaleur, and the Colonel, travelled with their own horses. No servants were taken but such as were indispensably necessary ; and on the fourth day from the arrival of the travellers at the Bishop's gates, they look their departure.

Lady SingletoiPs travelling barouche was occupied by herself, her daughters, their governess, and Mr. Dexter :	the Colonel drove Lady

Florence, in his curricle: and Mr.

Vandaleur was accompanied by his valet de chambre in his own chaise. Mr. Glentworth rode his favorite mare; the ladies’ maids took possession of the dick}?-boxes ; and two outriders brought up the cavalcade. Before they started, however, Mr. Dexter stood up, to observe to the party in general, that he was ready to ride when Mr. Glentworth was tired of his horse -—to drive when the Colonel was weary of the whip>—to resign his seat to Mr. Vandaleur ,or Lady Florence when either should prefer the barouche to the curricle or the chaise.

The cavalcade was then put in motion ; the Bishop, mounted on a little ambling nag, accompanied his guests to the gate of his favorite farm, with compliments, and regrets, and acknowledgments for the honor they had done him : he then made his bow, and left them to pursue their journey.

“ Prgy, Lady Singleton,” said Mr. ~e 5

Dexter, “ may I beg to know how my* Lord Bishop carne to be raised to the dignity of the mitre, for I understand he was very lately nothing more than a-private tutor ?”

“ How do you mean ?’* asked Lady Singleton.

“ Why certainly your Ladyship is quite right, in asking how I mean ; for of course is Lordship obtained his present dignity by his eminent talents and great piety. He is indeed a most learned and pious divine, and I dare say a very great preacher.,>

44 Yes,’* said Lady Singleton “ petit bourclaloue a la table, if you will, for he understands those sort of things a merveille; but he preaches like other people, 1 believe prosey enough ; antly as for his learning, 1 have heard Lady Llanberes prone him; but he is not known out of the families where he has lived :	they,	however,	were

persons of high influence, and he

could not fail to be made a bishop.’* “ Could not fail to be made a bishop!” repeated Mr. Dexter, emphatically. “ Very true, indeed; still ir was great kindness in his noble patrons

“ Not a bit of it,” interrupted Lady Singleton. “ It is a thing understood in great families : it makes a part of the attelage of household dignities. Had my Lord Singleton been blessed with a son and heir, I should have been amazingly annoyed if his tutor had not been made a bishop. However, I got one steward into the Treasury ; and my brother has pushed him up pretty high.”

Your brother has pushed him up. Lady Singleton in the Treasury! And may I ask your Ladyship what qualifications are requisite to fill a place in the Treasury? Supposing a

man had the good fortune to-----

Here Mr. Glentworth rode up to the

carriage, and interrupted the conversation by his remarks to Lady Singleton on the uncommon beauty of the weather, and the scenery through which they were passing; and though Mr. Dexter made several attempts, lie could find no opportunity of.renewing his inquiries relative to the Treasury, and the talents which would qualify a man to become a candidate for one of its official departments.

As far as the romantic and beautifully situated little town of Larne, the travellers had proceeded without impediment, and with some degree of pleasure and amusement. Air and exercise promoted health and spirits; and the fineness of the weather, and the excellence of the accommodation, hitherto kept all in good temper, and got the start of expectation. Lady Singleton had, however, something to blame or to rectify every step she took.. At Belfast, where they remained a day.

she proved, as she stood on the bridge^ that it should have been erected upon twenty arches instead of twenty-one; and endeavoured to convince a civil engineer whom she accidentally met, that the canal that connects the harbour with Lough Neagh was formed against every principle and system of inland navigation.

At Carrickfergus, where they were shown the spot where King William landed, she discovered he had chosen the very worst place on the coast ; and returned to lecture the innkeeper severely for the state of decay in which she found the fortifications.

44 It is not the fault of the town-folks, your Ladyship,’’ returned the man : 44 they have nothing to do with it. There is a governor appointed by Government, and with a good salary I warrant, my Lady.5'

4f And with a good salary !” repeated Mr. Dexter, knitting his brows.

“ Then,” said Lady Singleton, fC I shall have the thing inquired into. This is the way Government is always duped.3*

“ Unquestionably,'* added ?>Ir Dexter. “ I dare say it is a pretty lucrative post, Lady Singleton-—Governor of Carrickfergus. And if a man has interest----’*

“ The fact is,'* interrupted Lady Singleton,this wretched country is wretched merely because nobody thinks it worth their while to interfere and make things better.53

“ Critically,” echoed Mr. Dexter.

In their approach to the town of Larne, the beauty of its situation attracted universal admiration. Its little bay, penetrating through a rocky entrance, and taking, in its sweep, the villageofGlynn, the limestone quarries which skirt its coast, and the ruins of Olderfleet Castle, mouldering on the little peninsula of Curran, presented

objects of great picturesque beauty. Miss OTialloran, for the first time venturing at an observation, remarked to Lady Singleton, that the peninsula of Curran resembled the Sicilian Dri-panon, which produced a decided dissent from her Ladyship, This, Mr. Dexter followed upby--“ Undoubtedly, Ma'am. It is totally impossible that an Irish scene could resemble any thing in Italy: the comparison is really quite comical.

u Were you ever in Italy, Sir?*' drawled out Miss OTialloran.

44 No, Miss OTIalloran, not absolutely in Italy, though I have been abroad ; but I think I know it as well from her Ladyship’s description as if I had lived there all my life.”

The town of Larne once passed, a new region seemed to present itself. The roads became less practicable, the scene more wild. The great and stu-

pendous features, which characterise the coast of Antrim, now gradually developed themselves, in all their rudest grandeur. Promontories, bold and grotesque ; bays deeply insulating the mountainous shores ; rocks fantastically grouped, were the objects forming the picturesque. Lady Singleton held her carte au voyage in her hand. Glenarm was the next stage she had laid down, after Larne; and there she had decreed they were to dine and sleep. An avant-coureur was therefore dispatched, to make necessary preparations, the improbabilities of accommodation for so large a party not being taken into the account of her Ladyship’s calculations. The steepness and impracticability of the roads already began to undermine her patience, if they did not decrease her confidence in her own infallibility: but the surrounding scenery, though indescribably

wild, was not wanting in attraction to fix attention on itself. The'bold promontory of Ballygeliv, abruptly exhibiting its enormous, but well defined, pillars, presented the first specimen of the Basaltic region, into which they were about to penetrate.* The ruins of Cairne Castle, mouldering under the shadow of its cliffs, were partially tinged with the mid-day sun, that poured it cloudless radiance on the wild heights of theSaiagh Braes, which form the segment of a circle to the west of the coast, running from north to south.

The sun had not reached his meri-

* The rock on which these ruins moulder is insulated at high-water. Here, ii is said, a northern chieftain confined his daughter, to secure her from the importunities of another Leander, who, however, succeeded better in his hazardous enterprise than the youth of Abydos, and bore away his Irish hero, in spite of a tempestuous sea and a cruel father.

dian, when the romantic and lovely village o 1' Glenarm, with the broken outline of its hills, its limestone shores, its castle, and plantations, appeared to the eyes of the travellers, smiling amidst the surrounding wildness.* At the entrance of the village the avant-coureur, his horse smoking, rode up to the barouche, to say he had lost his way among the hills, and that he had but just entered the town, and discovered the inn : to this he pointed;, and the carriages drove up to a neat, pretty-

* When Lord Bissct fled from Scotland for the murder of the Earl of Athol, he was per, mitted to settle on this romantic spot by the-favor of Henry III. he, however, forfeited his Irish possessions in the reign of Edward IT. The Me. Donnels of Cantirc claimed and obtained the lauds of their kinsman, and the present Castle of Glenarm is the scat of their descendant, the Countess of Antrim. The ruins of a monastery founded by Lord Bissct are still visible.

looking cottage, while Lady Singleton continued to lecture, without mercy, the intimidated courier. The second out-rider had already entered the inn, to call some one to attend ; and Mr. Cdentworth observed, a9 the carriages drew up:

“ To expect accommodation in this little place, for such a party as our’s, is quite too absurd/*

“ How could I possibly suppose/* said Lady Singleton, “ that Glenarn* should only be a village, when 1 had set it down in my own mind it was a large post-town ?”

The servant now carne out of the house to say that he believed the people were all abroad, getting in the harvest, for they could only find an old woman in the inn kitchen, and that he could not make her understand him.

“ It s hard for her the cratur! when

she’s entirely botheredsaid a voice* which, from its peculiar tone and accent, drew every eye to the speaker. The person who had thus volunteered his observation, in all the unadulterated richness of a genuine Connaught brogue, stood with his huge arms folded, leaning against the side of the inn door, while a thick stick and a small bundle lay at his feet. Tho figure, thus disposed, was considerably above the ordinary heighth : muscular,-but not full, it exhibited an appearance of powerful strength, united with a lounging air of habitual indolence: a countenance, in which a sort of solemn humour was the leading expression, tinctured with an acute shrewdness, was shaded by long black hair, occasionally shaken back ; while a pair

* Bothered—deaf: almost always used bj the lower Irish to express deafness.

of dark sunken eyes were thrown indifferently on either side, and only with a slight passing look, turned, as if by chance, on the splendid strangers, whose shevvy persons and equipage seemed to excite neither admiration nor curiosity. The dress of this sin-.gular person was as equivocal as the figure was striking:	his	coat	might

have been an old livery—-might have been an undress military frock : it was a faded blue, with still more faded scarlet cuffs and cape. Though the day was sultry for September, he wore a loose, large rug coat, which was buttoned round his neck, but hung behind, like a mantle, with the sleeves unoccupied. Immense brogues, and blue stockings, were partially covered with black gaiters; and a pair of short canvas trowsers, reaching but a little way beneath his knees, completed his costume.

“ A prize !” cried the Colonel?

speaking through his hand to the party in the barouche. “The first genuine Paddy I have met since I have been in the north of Ireland,’’ he added, to Lady Florence.

“ Perhaps, Sir,” said Mr. Glentworth, addressing the stranger, ‘'-you can give us some information, as to the nearest town to this village, where we could get the best accommodation for so large a party as this.”

“ I can, Sir, to be sure—every information in life, your honor; not one in the barony can incense* you better, Sir:” and he took off his hat whilst he spoke: nor could he be prevailed on to resume it, while his dark countenance brightened into intelligence the moment he was addressed.

“ Come here, Sir,” cried Lady Singleton, beckoning to him—“ come here. Which is the nearest town to

* Incense—inform.

this miserable disappointing little vil~

lag e?”

61 Is it the nearest town to ye’z,* Madam ? Why then, Madam, the nearest town to ye’z, is the furthest off inti rely, in regard of the short cut being broke up since myself passed the same last; but the directest way ye’z can take is to turn across by that bit of a wood, to your lift”

44 What wood asked Lady Singleton : 44 there is no wood that I can see.*’

44 There is naly Madam ; but there’s all as one—for there was a wood there in th* ould times, as I hear tell. Well, ye’z lave the wood to the left, and ye’z will turn down, of you plase> right forenent you, and when ye’z come to the ind of the lane-----*'

% The distinction between addressing one or more persons is thus always marked—ye’z Î9 used as ye.

“ Well, Sir !” interrupted Lady Singleton, impatiently.

“ Well, Madam,” returned the stranger, in a tone of sudden recollection, “ the divil a foot further ye'z will go, any Jiow, in regard of the floods, which has darn'd up the road for ail the world like the salmon lep at Ballyshanny but sure if ye'z will be contint to go the ou Id way, ye’z have nothing to do in life, but turn round and go Lack straight before ye'z, and then, your Honor, you'll reach Lame in no timed'

This information, which excited a genera] laugh from all the party] but Lady Singleton and Mr. Dexter, was replied to by the latter, who exclaimed : “-Why you stupid, blundering fellow, that is the very town we are come from." *

* One of (he most celebrated salmon-leaps in Ireland, is near the eutrancc of the towu of Ballyshaanon.

“ !s its dearT* returned the Irishman, coolly.

Meantime, as it was evident they had another stage to perform before they halted for the evening* hay and water was procured for the horses ; and th© master -of the inn, who had come in from his fields, confirmed what they had suspected, that he could not accommodate so large a party, and directed them to a new inn* on the sea coast, within a short distance of the next post-town (New Town Glens), lately set up for the accommodation of travellers to the Causeway.

Lady Singleton had entered into con» versation with a linen buyer, or, in the language of the country, a icebber, who

* It may be perhaps necessary to inform ih# English tourist, who maybe induced ta risiHht Giant’s Causeway by the coasting road from Belfast to Bueh.Mills, that no such inn at- pre» sent exists, as is hero mentioned,

Y O L, Ï*	F

was riding by, and to whom, from beginning to enquire about the state of the roads between Glenarm and New Town Glens, she digressed to the texture and value of Irish linens, and gave him some useful hints relative to bleeeh-greens and other things con-

o	o

nectcd with the manufacture. - While-Lady Singleton was thus engaged with the itinerant merchant, who, on his part, was recommending her to their bouse at Colerain, if she intended to buy any linens, while in the very region of webbs and looms, the rest of the party, headed by the Colonel, were amusing themselves with the Irishman, who stood every interrogatory and attack with the utmost quietude, coolness, and gravity. On the subject, however, of the place of his nativity, (for the Colonel affected to think him an Englishman) he seemed a little puzzled: he repeated that County Do-negall was his undoubted native place,

though he had the good luck to be born in County Leitrim, Prowence of Connaught, which was all was left to the fore of poor ancient Quid Ireland, barring Munster;—u for/’ he added, “ every one of my people, grandfathers and grandmothers, from the beginning of time, barring myself, was born mand about Donegall town, till the English patentees and Scotch undertakers*' drove us all like wild bastes into the mountains, and into the Prowince of Connaught/’

* When the six counties in Ulster wert escheated by James I. a few of the leading chiefs, particularly the O’Donnels, fled to Spain and France : the rest of the land proprietors found asylums in Connaught» The inhabitants of these counties, even in the present day, ar& distinguished by the terms given to their anccs* tors in the statistical surveys of the county ; iij that of Donegal they are called patentees,« un* dert&kers3 and servitors or natives.

F 2

“ Then you are not a native of this province ?,s asked Mr. Glentworth.

<f ïs it me, Sir ? O ! no, your Honor, I am not : I hope I have done nothing, bad as Ï am, to be born in the black north, any way; ye’z might tell that by my English, for the era turcs in these parts have no English, only Scotch Irish, your Honor/5

45 We did indeed remark something peculiar in your English/' returned the Colonel; “but may I presume to ask what brings you into this country, since you seem to hold it rather jjn contempt ?’5

“ What brings me into this country, your Honor ? O, Em a traveller. Sir.55

£'* I thought so ; you have the air of a man who has seen a deal of the world.”

C{ O, I've seen a power, Sir, in my day : sure I was twice*t in Dublin, your Honor/5

■* Indeed ! and no further ?”

" No, Sir5 no further only onee’t in Gar many, on a little business; and a little while back in the Western Indies that’s when I was sarving in th* army, your Honor.!*

“ So then His Majesty has had the • honor of retaining you in his service }’* “01 he had, your Honor: God bless him.”

“ And pray, Captain, to what regiment were you attached r5'

“G ! your Honor’s going to the fair with me, now,j* any how : it never was Phaidrig (which is Patrick) Me. Rory’s luck, and that’s myself, to be a captain, yet,, Sir, only a corpolar ;— and what was my regimen, why then, troth, I was mighty near listing with »

* This is copied verbatim, i A common expression, meaning “ you are. gibing ?fie,”

F 3

the Tla ugh-u a * halagh boys,* under the great Ginirai Doyle, long life to him, wherever he is, only in regard of the master, who came home on account of the troubles. So J listed with him in the Irish Brigades ; and so we went to fight the black Frinch negurs in St. Domingo. Of as fine a regimen of lads as ever you clapt vour eve»

*/	1	%/	%/

on, not one of us but was kilt dead in the-field, barring a handful!, as I may say, and myself and the master.

“ Why you don't mean that a gentleman of your education and appearance is really in service ?**

“ O ! I do, Sir, surely ; and I'm th$ master’s foster-brother to boot, and has the greatest regard and love for him in

* Flaugh-na.halagh — clear the way—-(he

word with which General Doyle’s Irish regi. ment rushed into the heat of a fierce engage, ment.

life ; but at this present spaking Ï may say I’m no sarvant at all, only a jnl-grim3 J

A pilgrim ! you I’’

“ I am, Sir; surely, an't I going to keep my station at Lough-Dergh, in respect of a vow I made for taking a drop too much on a Good-Friday ; so with the master’s lave, and the blessing of God, I’m going to do pinnehce at the blessed and holy St. Patrick’s Purgatory.”* .

“ Purgatory !” repeated Mr. Dexter, shrugging his shoulders-*f so, I thought as much : and so, Mr. Me. Rory, you are really such a superstitious blockhead as to believe in purgatory, are

*v y y

you :

“ I believe. Sir, in what my church bids me, and what my people believed before me ; and what more does your

* For an account of this famous shrine of pilgrimage, see note at the end of this toIuithn F 4

Honor, and the likes of you do, nur that ? But in troth, in respect of purgatory, Sir, myself is no wavs peril* vular ; only, bad as it is, sure, your Honor may go further and fare worse for all that.**

This observation, quaintly uttered with a mixture of quietude and humor, produced n general laugh at Mr* Dexter’s expence, who replied with great acrimony of manner:—

So, Sir, it is very plain that you are a pretty bigotted, thorough going Papist, and think that every man who is otherwise will be damned/*

“ No, Sir, 1 am nat : l*m a Roman/*

* It is a singular circumstance, that the epithet Papist is rejected by tire louer Irish as being a term of reproach ; and that A. B. Usher has clearly proved, that the supremacy of Romo

was unknown to the earlier Christians of Ireland, and firs introduced into the country by ïlcury II. who came with a sword in one hand, and Pope Adrian's bull in the other.

mid sweet Jasus forbid that every man sliould’nt have a sowl to be saved, go what way he will ; and divil a diffir I believe it makes in the end, any how, whether a man goes to mass or church, only just for the fashion sake.’5

44 No, Sir, you don’t think any such thing,5* replied Mr. Dexter, with increasing ill-humor. “ I know what sort of person you are very well : you are one of those idle mischievous fellows, for I don’t credit a word of your story, who go about the country, stirring up the poor deluded people, and raising the cry of emancipation.5*

“ Of who, Sir?*' returned the Irishman, coming closer to the barouche, in which Mr. Dexter had just seated himself.

“ Emancipation ! You heard mevery well”

<c I have no call to him, Sir ; is he a /reckon hier

f f>

“ He, he, he!” cried Mr. Dexter,

4t that’s just what he wants to be/’

“ Why then no blame to him,” returned Me. Rory, tf for surely it makes all the cliillr if a man have a wote or have not a wote ; that’s when he gets into a scrimmage:* what compensation did I ever get for n\y poor brother, * Randall Me. Rory, who was kilt in a ruction, because I’d no gentleman to back me, having ourselves neither wote nor interest, and being Romans to boot ;j* for he was far away that would see me righted, any how; only he couldn’t be in two places at once, like a bird, long life to him.”

* Scrimmage, a term so often used upon all occasions of riot or confusion, must mean a skirmish; as ruction, though exclusively applied to a riot, must come from insurrection.

f A remark made by Mr. Young in his Irish Tour, Yol. 2nd. which bears upon Me. Rory’s observation, holds good to a certain degree at Ihis day,

14 And so,’* said Mr. Glentworth, willing to give the conversation another turn from that to which the folly and intemperance of Mr. Dexter was leading ; 44 and so, my friend, you are going to perform penance for the crime of getting tipsey on a Good-Friday: and how far have you travelled today

44 Not far, your Honor; only from New Town Glens, where you’ll get the best entertainment for man and baste ; and elegant fish/’

4f Do you really mean that r,J asked Mr. Vandaleur, who had hitherto remained silent, and lolling out of the window of his chaise.

4f Troth, I do, your Honor, every word of it; and it’s what you'll get a bit of mutton there that the Provost of Strabane need’nt be ashamed to stick his knife in of an Easter Sunday; long life to him ! — the real Ragkeryd’

44 Raghery ! what sort of mutton is

that/' demanded Mr. Vandaleur, witli some eagerness.

44 The elegantest, little, dear mutton, your Honor, that ever you set your two good-looking eyes on; the leg of it, not bigger nor the leg of -

lark, Sir,* to say nothing of the beautiful salmon fish that comes leaping into your arms,, fairly out of the water—the craturs, with their tails in their mouths,f and their elegant fine

*	The island Raghcry, off the Antrim coast, is famous for its small breed of cattle : the mutton is particularly delicate and sweet.

*	At the'mouth of almost every river and streamlet in this county, there is a salmon fishery ; the salmon leaps are also numerous î

Men*, vhen the laboring fish does at the fort arrive,

And finds that by his strength he does but vainly strhc, fits tail takes in his month, and bending, &c. «fcc. &c.

On a VTOJf.

This opinion also prevails among the ficher» men of the salmon cuts in Antriroe

fins, twinkling in the sunshine, for all the world like that Lady’s eye, there/* and he bowed low to Laxly Florence, who leaning forward, and smiling graciously, returned ;

“ Thank you, thank you, Mr. Rory. I assure you, I think yGu altogether a most amusing person, and particularly gallant- and exactly what 1 should expect .an Irishman to beT

“ Why then, devil a much out you are there, Madam, or Miss; for my« self does’nt know well which you are ; ids few of the likes of you comes into these parts any how, God bless you/’ The horses being now fed, and Lady Singleton having made all the enquiries, and given all th-e advice she thought proper, called out to the party, who were still amusing themselves with the com m u n i ca t i v e ï r i s h ma n, “ Basta, basta, cosi; come, we have lost time enough : Thompson, get on: Mr. Dexter, put up the head of the barouche at your

side. So, I have sent Edwards on before us to prepare for our reception.5*

The cavalcade now proceeded, and the Colonel, whose curricle was last, took off his hat with great ceremony to Me. Rory, expressing a hope that they should meet again, and assuring him he was proud to have made the honor of his acquaintance. Me. Rory, on his side, bowed with equal ceremony, and Mr. Glcntworth desiring the outrider to give him some monev, followed

O	«/	7

the carriages.

The Englishman, who had been extremely amused with Pat, was much pleased with the commission, but with great difficulty succeeded in prevailing on him to take half-a-crown.

“ Why then, see here, my lad,” said Me. Rory, putting it up, “itis’ntin regard of the lucre of gain that I take • their two and eight pence, only to drink their healths this night before I sleep ; and troth, every farthing of it I’ll lay

out for that same, if it was a golden guinea ; so I will, for they are real and undoubted quality, surely ; barring, in» deed, that young man in the corner of the landau, who wanted to do me out of my devotion. Well, see here; Pll bet a dollar, that’s if i had it, that he’s no gentleman, but some poor relation, or a follower of the family, like myself, that gets the run of the house, and sticks like a burr; for it’s remarkable, that it’s always the likes of them takes most on themselves ; so it is all the world over.”

The Englishman shook hands heartily with him, said, he was not much out; that he was a d—d good fellow, and he was sorry he could not wait to make more of his acquaintance: he then rode on.

The fact was, that Mr. Dexter, from an officious interference with every branch of Mr. Glentworth’s household, had rendered himself unpopular with

every subordinate member of the family, and the overbearing haughtiness with which he endeavoured to give weight to his usurped authority did not tend to sooth away the prejudices which that usurpation had excited against him.

Mr. Dexter was one of those worthy successors to the led captains of other times, who, without birth, without education, without talent, make their way through the gradations of society from their own original obscurity, by artful obsequiousness, and by flattering the foibles, courting the favor, and gliding into passive conformity with the passions and opinions of those from whose rank they can borrow consequence, from whose influence they may derive profit,: nor was Me. Rory far from the mark, when he likened him to an order of persons in his own country, who, too indolent to labour and too poor for independence,, rest

their claims for idle maintenance on some distant relationship, and by an artful study of the character of those on whom they prey, govern while they adulate, and influence where thev

7	v

affect to depend.

.	v

t

r

CHAPTER 5

The tourists now proceeded along the wild and winding shores which skirt the northern seas, between the valley of Clenarm, and the little maritime town of New Town Glens. Annoyed bv the increasing badness of the rugged roads, or busied in invectives against their overseers, of whose negligence she threatened to make a formal complaint, Lady Singleton at length became insensible to the peculiar features of the scenery, nor did prospects, however consonant to the fantastic genius of a Salvator Rosa, or the wild and gloomy imagination of an Ossianj compensate to the travellers for jolts which almost dislocated, nor ruts and dykes which threatened wheels, and put patent springs to the test: Mr.

Glentworth, therefore, who still rode, in vain pointed out to them the beautiful inland views afforded by glens and mountains, and the distant villages of Gienclye and Carnalloch ; nor were they more struck by the bolder features of the coast, particularly the romantic promontory of Garron*, which stretches along the coast, and opposes its sharp, salient angles, to the inclusive turbulence of the waves. Yes, yes,” returned Lady Florence, endeavouring to skreen her face from the sea air, iC \ t is all very fine ; but if you have a mind to charm me with a prospect, shew me the chimney tops of our inn.”

They now continued to wind along the shores of the Red Bay, at the base

* Garron, u the sharp point.” The site of the fortress of Dnnmall is still to be traced along1 this coast, where, tradition assert* all the rent of Ireland was once paid ; probably the revenues of the Dalaradians.”

of tlie heights of Craig Murphy. At no great distance from the ruins of Red Ray Castle, appeared a small neat, house, and under a swinging sign, ornamented with the shamrock and thistle, was inscribed in large characters : >the Castle Inn, by Alexander Mc. Donald.” The house was surrounded by very ,bold and romantic coast-scenery. The avant-coureur had been more successful here than at Glenarm, and had obtained, at least, the promise of every due accommodation.

The first object with the travellers was a luncheon, and what Lady Singie-ton denominated un toilette du voyage, for she had previously stipulated with Lady Florence, that they should not throw off their habits for less convenient drapery, till they reached her own house at LoughS willy: the toilette de voyage was therefore soon dispatched, and a luncheon in the interim, con-

listing simply of potatoes and butter» was spread on an oak table in the middle of a white-washed parlour.

Sharp appetites, however, furnished a sauce picquante to the homely fare^ and every one surrounded the table but Mr. Yandaleur, who stood aloof looking on with looks of utter despair,

44 This is a sorry prelude/’ he said_, shrugging his shoulders, 44 Ï am afraid Mr. Me. Rory's salmon and little mut« ton existed only in his own imagination/1

44 We shall know that directly/* said Lady Singleton. :c 1 have sent for our host/*

ff Meantime, then/' said Mr. Yandaleur, 44 Til try a biscuit/' and he rung the bell for his own servant.

44 You don’t expect to get biscuits here that are eatable, do you V* asked Lady Singleton."

44 There are certain things I never expect to get good any where out of

my own house, Lady Singleton, except I carry them with me.”

<c All prejudice/* said Lady Singleton—“ and I would prove it if 1 had you in England/*

Here Mr. Vandaieur*s Frenchman* who, when travelling, served him as cook and valet de chambre (his own cook having stipulated never to leave London), made his appearance.

ci Have we any biscuits left, La Tour?” demanded Mr Vandaleur.

“ Eh! mais oui, Monsieur:”

“ Bring in the case. Let trie see what you have got.** Lady Florence threw a sly and smiling look at the Colonel.

44 What have you got there. Monsieur?” she demanded, as La Tour took a little canister out of a leather case.

“ It is, Miladi, de café a la creme' pour prendre par le nez, qui dissipe les douleurs des yeux, et refraiehit ie cerveau par son odeur agréable et suave”

“ But, La Tour,” said Lady Florence, 44 we want to dissipate our appetites with something more than an odeur suave.”

44 Eh bien, Miladi, here is de his-cui tins d’Amerique —et la parfaite amond, et—”

■ 44 Give me a biscuit and a little parfaite amond,” said Mr. Vandaleur, who sat listlessly looking on : cr if any body chooses liqueurs, they will find some here worth .tasting.”

44 I must beg leave^ to doubt that,” said Lady Singleton,, while La Tour helped the gentlemen : 44 there are now no genuine liqueurs to be had in England—i have a reason for knowing it.” 44 For which reason, I import my own,” returned Mr. Vandaleur.

44 So I should suppose,” said Mr. Dexter, putting his throat to the torture, to get down a hot potatoe, that he might say something civil, as he took the liqueur out of La Tour’s hand.

u Upon my word this is exquisite/* he continued, smacking’ his lips, “ quite exquisite.1**

“ No/’ said Mr. Vandaleur: ct that which you are drinking must be very bad, from its colour,**

Mr, Dexter now observing that Lady Singleton had left the room, obsequiously repeated :

u Why, certainly, if you say so, it doubtless must be, Mr, Vandaleur ; for you must be, out and out, the first judge of these tilings in Great Britain/* “ Yes, I think I know a little in that way, he returned. Where did we get that wretched stuff, La Tour— from Paris ?’*

u Eh mais non, Monsieur/' Adding with a contemptuous shrug— “ Nous /avons eu de ce Londres la bas!” While the landlady, her daughters, nieces, and maids, were now all put under requisition by Lady Singleton, who was bustling through every room

in the house, the landlord attended Mr. Vandaleur’s summons in the parlor.

Irish innkeepers are generally gentlemen: they are gentlemen farmers, gentlemen excisemen, gentlemen sub-sheriffs ; but they are always gentlemen, ànd therefore most commonly above the subordinate situation of innkeepers. Mr. Alexander McDonald however was not by extra profession a gentleman; not however that he was in the least more attentive or civil for being confined to what he professed— his manner and address were fair specimens of his class in the North of Ireland.

cc Pray, Sir, what can we have for dinner?’* asked Mr. Yandaleur—“ any thing?”

“ Well, ye just can—any thing ye please to call for.”

“ Fish, for instance?” asked Mr. Vandaleur.

VOL. I.	Q

‘f Aye, troth, as gude as ever swam in the sea.”

44 What sort, pray?—salmon ?”

44 Troth, I dinna ken, tall the boats come in.”

44 So then we are to depend, upon wind and tide for our dinner, I suppose ?”

44 Nay, ye munna depend on that— the mestress has kelVd her peg to-day : ye can tak vour choice from head to tail.”

46 Of a fresh-killed pig?” returned Mr. Vandaleur, with an inspiration amounting to a groan. 44 Have you not some small mutton peculiar to this country ?”

46 Not kell’d ; but we wull the morrow. We have a nice wee bit of a haunch of venison in the house,

but------”

44 A haunch of lohcit in the house ?” interrupted Mr. Vandaleur, starting on his legs.

cc A haunch of venison, sent my mestress in lieu of some spenning she git done for Belly McAdam, my Lord’s gamekeeper at Glenarm, but I doubt it’s but just meddling. Thou* is too stale, I doubt/’

“ Too stale—impossible!” exclaimed Mr. Vandaleur : “ let me see it immediately. But who is to dress it?”

“ Well, the woman just will.”

“ The woman—what woman ? No woman upon earth can dres sany thing. My servant will dress it under my direction. Ï will go to your kitchen, if you will try and get your disagreeable turf not to smoke.”

“ Fin a hil it shall smoke, I warrant you,” returned Mr. M'Donald, laughing. ic Fin a hit.” j*

* Thou—that.

+ Fin a hit-—Devil a bit. tc Scarcely a trace ôf. Irish language, customs, or story, can be G- 2

cc Can I be of any use to you, Mr. Vandaleiir?** said Mr. Dexter, stepping forward. “ I once understood that kind of thing pretty well : indeed, I belonged to a beef-steak club. 1 have my little silver gridiron somewhere; , we wore it at our button-hole, with a rose-coloured ribbon.”

“ No, I thank yon, Mr. Dexter; Tli try what I can do with La'four; not that he is particularly excellent in that line.31

“ Pourtant, Monsieur!” returned La Tour, “défais mon petit possible!”

“ We shall see/’ said Mr. Yanda-leur; and he left the room, accompanied by his valet and the host, while Mr. Dexter went to look after the sta-

fouml along the north coasts. The few who use the Celtic at all, speak a mixed dialect called Scotch-Irish.”

Sec Hamilton’s Letters on Antrim.

Dies, since he was not permitted to officiate in the kitchen.

During the culinary dialogue, Lady Florence and the Colonel, who stood leaning their fine figures against the chimney-piece, exchanging looks and smiles of ridicule and intelligence, now both burst into an immoderate fit of laughter at their friend's expence.

“ Poor Mr. Vandaleur !" exclaimed Lady Florence :	he	is	an excellent

person in his way: I hare a great friendship for him : I have indeed.”

“ Which he returns," said the Colonel, “ with an exclusive and profound devotion."

“ No, I don’t think that ; but we go on very well together. You know the way one lets a man follow one, year after year, just meaning nothing at all .—I wish he would marry."

“ If he did," said the Colonel, laughing, it must be Mrs. Glass, or the complete Housekeeper."

G 3

And they were still laughing at this ben-frovato, when Lady Singleton bustled into the room.

“ I have set,” she said, “ all the maids to scour the rooms ; Ï have changed all the beds, and made the old Scotch-Iris it landlady, who has la Crasse of both nations on her hands, stare her eyes out—and now we must all walk, and see what is to be seen, while we have an hour’s day-light. 1 want to walk down to the shore. I have taken it into my head from the view I have had of the strand, that there is excellent stuff there for repairing the roads; instead of which, our host tells me they are supplied from a whin-stone quarry.—01 how Irish that is: the quarry is the least trouble. Mais allons: Mr. Glentworth and the girls are waiting for us at the hall-door, and Mr. Vandaleur is staying to superintend the venison : he would not even hear me speak on the subject.”

The Colonel and Lady Florence followed her with shrugs of annoyance: the amour-propre of each supplied food and occupation to the other. The Colonel, vain and indifferent, flattered, that he might be flattered in turn ; and Lady Florence, who saw with 44 equal eye,’*

e( A hero perish, or a sparrow fall,”

and who, in common with Madam d$ Maintenon, prized all conquests, from a porter’s to a prince’s, beheld with increasing satisfaction the progressive subjugation of the galiant Colonel. Besides, being flattered that a man who quizzed all the world had not only entered into an alliance with her, defend sive and offensive, but was, in the truest * sense of the word, quizzed by herself; for though she threw out lights to mislead his vanity, she was in fact as indifferent to him as to Mr. Vandaleur? and the rest of the world.

g 4*

The part y now proceeded on their ramble, led by Lady Singleton and Mr* Dexter, who descended towards the shore.

The son was setting with great richness over the Heights of Siiahh-Bar-raglv* Volumes of purple clouds were floating in the atmosphere, and the glassy surface of the distant waters was here and there daikly spotted with fishing: boats. Along the remoter shores»

O	O

the curling smoke of the burning seaweed rose in azure columns, and broke into light vapours, throwing an aerial tint over the whole of the perspective»

*■ The Irish language is extremely copious -tond fruitful in terms of scenic description : they have various epithets to mark observable heights rising above (he surface of the earth. Knock,” signifies a low hill, standing single, without any continued range. u Sliabh,” pronounced Sleeve, a high craggy mountain, ascending in ridges : the Biémi, or Benn, a mountain of the first magnitude, ending iu an abjupt precipice.

The entire foreground was bold and

c1

massive ; the fantastic groupings of the rocks, scattered in grotesque forms along the shores of the Red Bay ; the ruined Castle, rising above the caverned cliff,* and the Heights of Sliabh-Bar-ragh cutting abruptly against the declining sun's red light, presented a combination of scenic features of great vigour and boldness; rude and wild, indeed, but highly picturesque, and finely set off bv the lights and shades of the

%/	O

season and hour. Thegroup, alone, accidentally placed in the picture, were incongruities in the masterly composition.

The tide was now coming in with such rapidity, that Mr. Glentworth proposed ascending among the rocks,

$

** The caverns of this cliff consist of three chambers. They were once occupied as schoolrooms, through the path leading to them is fright» fully precipitous.

before they were overtaken by its insidious incursion ; and when they had attained the summit of one of the lower cliffs, he pointed out some of the most striking features in the scene ; observing that many of the rocks, among which we had been a few minutes before, confidently loitering, were now entirely surrounded by water, and ap_ parently isolated from the main coast.* <c It would have been quite an adventure/' said Lady Florence, who had now, in a tête-a-téte conversation with the Colonel, reached the very head and front of sentimental abstraction, Cf it would be quite an adventure to have been surrounded by the sea, while standing on one of those cliffs, wrapt in thought or heavenly pensive meditation/'

— --------------------------------.—...

* Doctor Hamilton, in his celebrated Letters on the Coast of Antrim, describes these shores as being fantastically beautiful.

44 Pray observe that distant cliff to the left/’said Mr. Glentworth. “ Does it not represent just such an image as your Ladyship has conjured up? the situation were not impracticable to human foot, would you not say that some fool-hardy person had balanced himself on that rocky pinnacle/5 441 think, Sir,” said Miss O’Halloran, abruptly, 4<r it realizes the idea one has of the statue of Peter the Great placed on a solid rock/5

Every body smiled ; partly at the brogue, partly at the suddenness with which she broke through her long preserved silence.

44 Your observation is very just, Miss O’Halloran/* said Mr. Glentworth. 44 The form of that rock has, in the light we now see it, precisely the proportions and air of a well executed statue.— it seems almost to move upon the sight/’

s: Good Heavens! Why it does move,” said Lady Florence.

“ La! so it does!” said both the Miss Singletons in a breath.

44 It is Peter the Great himself, no doubt,” said the Colonel.—-u Seriously, however, Miss O’ilalioran, there really was a great deal of imagination in your remark.”

cc O, there is nobody so clever as Miss G’rlalloran, I am sure/* returned Lady Florence.

Lady Singleton, and Mr. Dexter, who was filling his pockets with pebn bics, at her Ladyship’s commands now approached ; and Mr. G lent wort I) pointed out the figure on the rock to her, saying:

C£ You may be certain that is the presiding Genius of the shore ; and he 1ms risen from the waves, to accuse you and Mr. Dexter of the thefts you are committing on his territories.”

“ That/' said Lady Singleton, raising her glass, 44 that is some foolish person looking for samphire ; but 1 can tell him he is amazingly mistaken, if he thinks to get any on this description of rock.”

4‘ .Mistaken, indeed,” echoed Mr Dexter.

“ What 1” said the Colonel—“ Peter the Great transformed into a samphire gatherer !---What an anti-climax!”

“ Whoever it be,” said Mr. Glent-worth, “ he certainly appears to set no great value upon life; for, as he now stands, he seems, at this distance at least, to be in a most perilous situation. One false step would precipitate him into that mass of waters, which roars between the two opposite rocks.” Almost as he spoke, the person sprung from his giddy station, and to all appearance sunk into the wavgs. The ladies screamed.

66 It is some wretched suicide/’ cried Lady Florence, faintly. cc 1 fear I shall faint—I shall, indeed : I have not nerves

for this----*’

ie Fly, Mr. Glentworth, down to the shores,” cried Lady Singleton : “ let a boat be put out directly—he shall yet be saved.’*

Mr. Glentworth was already out of hearing. Fie had sprung down the rocks with the agility of eighteen, followed by Miss OMIalloran; while the Colonel and the Miss Singletons remained with Lady Florence.

c< Shall I go, and try to be of some assistance?” said Mr. Dexter, without moving a step.

,s No, no,** said Lady Singleton ; u sit down quietly here. Keep ail your breath. We must save this poor man. You shall blow into his mouth and nostrils, Mr. Dexter: *tis a thing done every day. F11 save him; only ob-

serve my orders. I am quite au fait to suspended animation. I have sent some useful hints to the Society.”

<£ But if the man is drowned?” said Mr. Dexter, in some trepidation, and seating himself as he was desired.

“ No matter for that: mind me; and we shall recover him all the same/’

Mr. G lent worth now waved his hat from below, and the next moment, followed by the governess, ascended the rocks.

“ All is safe!"’ he cried out, as he approached; “ all is right. We could not see, at this distance, that the man jumped into a boat, anchored under the shadow of the rock on which he stood; and not, as we supposed, into the sea. Neither is the rock so high and precipitous as the particular direction of the evening shadows makes it appear.”

£f How tiresome !” said Lady Single-

ton, disappointed that there was nothing to do.

“ And to have one's feelings put to the torture for nothing at all,'* added Lady .Florence, languidly: while, as the whole party directed their steps towards home, from which they were more than a mile distant, Mr. Glent-worth pointed out to them the object of their former solicitude, rowing his little boat under the rocks on which they were walking, his sole companion a dog, which appeared, even at that distance, of immense size, and who sat in the stern.

“ The whole little set-out," said Mr. Glentworth, 66 partially tinged as it is with light, is extremely picturesque.5'

“ Is it not very like a drawing we copied of La Port's, Horatia?” asked Miss Singleton.

61 So it is, Caro; only there is no

tree in the corner. I believe there ought always to be a tree in the corner of a real landscape.’’

' The boat now disappeared behind a little promontory of rocks, and the ramblers gradually descended towards a strandy beach where the tide had not • intruded, wearied of acclivities and declivities, in spite of Mr. GientwortlTs advice to keep on the heights.

They were now within view of the inn, and scarcely half a mile distant, when they again perceived the little boat undulating near the shore, and empty; a little in advance, the rower, with his gigantic dog lying at his feet, was seated on a fragment of rock, and .seemed busily employed in breaking up some stones, which, as he effected, he threw into a little basket beside him. The party had now approached .so near as to alarm the dog, who sprung forward with a dreadful yell to attack theip. The ladies screamed, the gen-

tlemen parried his attack with their canes,, and the stranger starting up, cried with a voice deep as the tones of the gigantic animal they commanded :

Bran !” The dog crept back growling to his master’s feet, who, removing the fur cap which covered his head, said : —

Pray pass on, there is no danger whatever to be apprehended from the

When the ladies had passed, he resumed his cap and occupation, and began to hammer as before. The contrast exhibited in bis person, manner, dress, and occupation, was so striking, as to keep the party for a moment silent, from surprize. They had supposed him a fisherman, and his address and air were not only those of a gentleman, but of a distinguished gentleman.

He was, however, pretty nearly clad in the costume of the profession they Jiad assigned him : his whole dress con-

sisted of a grey jacket and trowsers, a black silk neck handkerchief, and a fur cap; but his person, though so little set off by the advantages of dress, was conspicuously fine : his height was majestic ; and his head for a moment exhibited, as he drew off his cap, was so little the head of a common man, that it had attracted the notice and admiration of Lady Florence, who exclaimed : —

“ What an extraordinary looking person! What a magnificent head £ Take him with his e}7es and his dog, altogether he is by much the finest thing 1 ever saw in my life: who can he be ?,J>

“ Why, a surety or of the roads, or something of that sort,” returned Lady Singleton, with a tone of decision. “ The innkeeper told me there was such a person in the neighbourhood, and indeed Ï meant to send for him before I leave this place, and rate

him soundly for the shameful state in which we have found.the roads: nay, I may as well take the present opportunity.”

To Lady Florence’s great satisfaction., and Mr. Glentworth’s great dismay, she turned quickly back and approached the stranger, who rose as s*he drew near, keeping his hand on his dog’s neck, as he also started up with a faint growl.

“ I beg pardon, Sir,” saiu Lady Singleton, “ for interrupting your occupation: pray go on with your work.”

“ It was only the occupation of an idle man, Madam,” returned the stranger, bowing; “ and—”

iC I know very well what you are about/’ interrupted Lady Singleton» taking up some flints from his basket: “ pray of what strata are these shores composed ? I have a particular reason for wishing to know/’

O

The stranger, with evident surprize marked in his countenance, replied, ' after a moment’s hesitation, and throwing his eyes rapidly over the group :—

“ I have not accurately examined them, Madam, beyond the mere surface, but I believe this particular line of shore consists of a series of red sandstone, intersected by strata of granite, and containing, in certain directions, veins of calcareous spar/*

Lady Singleton threw round a look at the rest of the party, who now, with the exception of Mr. Glentworth, in-circled the stranger, as if to say—44 you see I was right,'* then addressing the stranger, she said :—

44 Well, Sir, I must say that you do not turn your knowledge to much account, for your roads are as bad as if you were totally ignorant of the materials with which these shores furnish you to repair them ; and, 1 must also say, that I do not understand how peo-

pie can go on forever taking the King’s money without performing the services expected and required by the government: the using whin-stone is merely, I suppose, to make a job, as the quarry is private property, while the strand affords such pebbles as these.—Come here, Mr. Dexter, shew this gentle man the pebbles we have picked up.” Mr. Dexter busily emptied hi» pockets into his hat, crying :—

“ The roads are as her Ladyship observes, in execrable order;” and he raised his eyes to the stranger’s face to discover the effect produced by the title of Ladyship. But the stranger, exhibiting no other emotion in his countenance than the most profound amazement, observed :—

“ I beg pardon ; but I rather suppose, Madam, you must mistake me for some other person.’’

“ No, no,5’ interrupted Lady Single-ton, ■“ 1 am not so liable to he mistaken.

I know very well you are the person I wanted particularly to see—you are the surveyor or director of the roads here : I don’t exactly know how you term the office in Ireland.’5

“ No, indeed, Madam/5 he replied, smiling ; “ I am not : I have not the honor to hold any place so ostensible.55

“No!” said Lady Singleton, in a tone of mortification : “ then I am sure I beg your pardon : but I naturally supposed from your particular occupation, from having heard that one of the overseers of the roads was in the neighbourhood—but I beg pardon ; I am sorry to have disturbed you.55

The stranger bowed, and assured her all apology was unnecessary.

ei I was not the only one deceived about you, however, Sir,55 added Lady Singleton, willing to throw a part of her blunder upon others :	for	you	have

been an object of conjecture to all our

party for some time back, and have been taken for all sorts and manner of things/’

“You have indeed been an object of solicitude to us,” said Lady Florence, in a voice of blandishment, “ and we were at a loss to assign a motive sufficiently strong for the risk you incurred: the rock seemed quite a Leucadia, ■ and your plunge into the waters, as we thought it, a lover’s leap.”

“ The rock, Madam/’ returned the stranger with an air of pleasantry,

“ was not, I believe, quite so steep as the Leucadian promontory, nor was the motive of my ascending it so exalted as to bring its excuse along with it for my risk—I merely landed there to procure a specimen of zeolite, which now lies fractured in that basket.”

“ There is no spirit more daring/’ said Mr. Glentworth, advancing with a slight bow, “ than the enterprizing spirit of science.—1 dare say, Sir, that

the coast of Antrim affords an ample field to geological inquiry.”

“ I should suppose it must, Sir,” returned the stranger, “from its general structure, particularly the Basaltic districts; but I am myself an idle observer, and have rather admired than explored them : my knowledge of the region is almost wholly confined to the theories and principles which the industry, ingenuity, and experiments of others have applied to its phenomena/’

“ If I recollect right,’* replied Mr. Glentworth, with increasing interest^ “ Sir William Hamilton asserts that wherever Basaltic pillars are found, a volcano must at some time or other have existed/'

“ I believe/’ said the stranger, “ that the volcanic hypothesis has been generally applied to the Giant’s Causeway, and what is rather singular, there is,.J

VOL. i.	h,

nm told, nn old Irish tradition which bears out the supposition.5’

cc I shall never believe that,” said Lady Singleton, 44 until I find some specimens of lava on these shores. I have some pieces of a lava in my possession at this moment ; I got them in a cabinet of natural history I bought from a Jew at Florence ; it contains all sorts of things, and 1 have added to it some pretty specimens of shells, which 1 picked up myself on the shores of the Mediterranean”

It must be a most valuable article, that cabinet/’ said Mr. Dealer : (< and your Ladyship picked up shells your» self on the shores of the Mediterranean! how fine! what a savage little spot this must appear to you—for your Ladyship might Walk upon this strand for over without even picking up as much as a pire tty little cockle-shell” Here one of Miss Q’Halloran'*

abrupt bursts of laughter startled the whole party, and almost threw Mr. Dexter into confusion.

The stranger, during this little dialogue, had directed his glances to the group which had so unexpectedly appeared in a scene so little appropriated ■ to such dramatis personæ ; but his eyes rested longest on the elegant form of Lady Florence, who, seemingly un- | conscious of his gaze, stood drawing a velvet mantle round her in folds a statuary would vainly have attempted to imitate. Miss O’Halloran’s laugh, however, drew all his observation on herself, but her short clumsy cloak and deep straw bonnet, which gave her the air of a little Reel Riding-hood, or a Dutch toy, did not for a moment fix his attention : he again turned É€ to metal more attractive,” assisting Lady Florence to gather up her mantle,which bad fallen from her grasp.

The incorrigible risibility of the h â

governess did not go unreproved by Lady Singleton, who lectured her in Italian, while the Colonel declared that her laugh was quite fair, and would make the fortune of a low comedy actress. Mr. Glentworth at once, to cut short further exposure of his own party,, and further intrusion on the stranger’s pursuits, now proposed to return, as the dews were beginning to fall; and taking off his hat to the stranger, who bowed gracefully in return, he led the way back to the inn.

£C I am much deceived,” said Lady Florence, “ if that is not a person of some consideration, notwithstanding his grey jacket and his little Montera cap.

u He is unquestionably ügentleman f added Mr. Glentworth, ct and probably here on some scientific research ; some amateur naturalist, perhaps.

O î I am never taken in by un air

imposant ,” said Lady Singleton, t£ and as to his science—”

Before she could finish her sentence, the stranger re-appeared, and addressing Mr. Glentworth, he said,

<c I beg your pardon—-but Ï perceive you are returning to the inn, by the beach. Since you passed it, it is overflowed by the tide, which is a spring one ; but if you will allow me, I will conduct you by another path/* Mr. Glentworth made due acknowledgments for this politeness, and thankfully accepted the offer. The stranger then led the way, by ascending from the shore, and conducted them through a bye road, while Lady Florence, patting his dog’s head, drew him towards her, by expressions of her admiration at his favorite’s size and beauty ; and by inquiring if he was not of the Newfoundland breed.

He replied in the negative, adding^ that it was the descendant of a race

TT <3

now almost extinct, for which the country was once celebrated—the Irish wolf-dog.

*c I think you called him Bran/* said Lady Singleton, tfc I don’t think that is an appropriate name for a dog of this description.0

“ It is an old name, however. Madam/' he replied, 56 for dogs of this race in this country. It was,” he added, smiling, “ the name of the favorite hound of one of our national heroes, Fionne-ma-cunihal; better known, as “ Fingal “ Then,” said Mr. Glentworth, you still claim Fingal as your own, and really believe that such a person Existed ?”

“ At least,0 said the stranger, smiL

* A mark is shewn in a mountain in Tyrone, near New Town Stewart, which is said to be 6i the track of Bran’s feet,” the celebrated greyhound of Fingal, whose memory is held in reyc* ronce no less than his master’s.

hig, 6t this is not a place to express' scepticism * for we happen, at this moment, to inhabit a bardic region, and to tread on consecrated ground* We are now on the borders of the valley of Glenariff, or, the valley of the Chiefs, which is particularly sa*

• cred to Ossian, and still retains some objects, distinguished by the names of his co'temporaries. That bill, so remotely seen by the rising moon-beam falling on its summit, and which appears but an illuminated vaoour, is called Luirg Eaden, and still retains' traces of a fortress, which the people of the country, to this day, call “Fort-clan-a-Mourna,5’ and is supposed to have been the garrison of Fingal, and his “ Clan-na«Boiskine.,J#

- The little village of CushindalL “ Cot's-an-* da-calladhThe river foot of the Two Swans in the neighbourhood Gf Gleneriff, is supposed to derive its name from a predatory Scot7 who

H 4

<e These are curious facts, indeed,” said Mr. Glentworth.

“ Oh ! beyond every thing interesting,0 said Lady Florence, “ only the language is so difficult to pronounce— t£ clag-nag-bosht* O ! I should never manage/'

“ It must be owned,0 said the Colonel, throwing an intelligent look at her Ladyship, “ that it is a magnificent language—the Irish ! only it is unpronounceable by an English organ.0 The “ aughs,*’ and “ cloghs,” for instance.

Onghs and doughs/’ repeated Mr. Dexter, laughing and winking at the Colonel, jocosely, “ oughs and cloghs ! the fact is, the Irish is a most rude and barbarous tongue, and surprisingly discordant.’'

fell by the hand of Oisin or Osian, u whose tomb many of the natives pretend to have seen on the coast.”

“ It may appear so to those who don’t understand it,” returned the stranger coolly:	those	who do, are

of a different opinion—I believe,” he added, turning to Mr. Glentworth, “ the topography of England has retained* the language of the Ancient Britons, in most of the prominent features of the country; and though to foreign earsl know it sounds barbarously harsh, yet, of course, it does not strike the natives of the land as being either rude or discordant. It is thus in Ireland, with us ; and to our ears, the cloghers and aughcrs are quite as har-* monious as Gigleswick and Jinglepul to natives of Derbyshire.”

“ Or Asgrigg, or Dowgaîlscar,,, added Mr. Glentworth, laughing, “ in* the neighbourhood of which places we happen to live ; so, Sir, you see you have produced a strong case in point.”

H 5

“ Yon are of course, Sir, a native of this country,” said Lady Singleton, 14 by your knowing so much about it. Will you be so good as to speak a little Irish ?”

As she spoke, the stranger advanced to a little gate, and holding it open as the ladies passed through, he observed, 44 You have only to cross the meadow before you, and you will reach the inn in a few minutes: it lies to the left.”

He then bowed, and followed by his dog, walked away with great rapidity, 44 How very odd/3 said Lady Florence,, casting a look over her shoulder; but he was already out of sight—44 how very odd that he should go off so abruptly. There can be no question about his being a gentleman. What do you think of him. Colonel ?”

“ Why, he is a good-looking kind of Irish giant enough; but 1 observe that

all men look well in that sort of dress. I should not wonder, however, if you were deceived in him.”

“Nor in the least,” said Mr. Dexter.

“ Well, I should,” said Lady Single-ton : “ there is something of the bet • usage, about him not to be mistaken.”

“ Critically/’ observed Mr. Dexter.

“ Ï wish, with all my soul, we had asked him to join our dinner party at the inn, though very likely he would have declined the invitation,” said Mr. Glentworth.

“ Decline! I like that” said Lady Singleton. “ I daresay he would be but too much flattered. Go, Mr. Dexter; pray, run after him—you will easily overtake him ; and ask him to dine with us at seven o’clock.”

Mr. Dexter obeyed, or rather affected to obey ; but returned in a few minutes apparently out of breath, as-

serti ng that he could not overtake him-without running the risk of losing his own way.

“ Well, we shall probably find him at the inn, as, of course, he sets up there/’ and in this conviction they arrived at the inn-door: the waiter, however, who was stationed at it, and who was immediately questioned by the two ladies, asserted, that no such person had set up at the Castle, and that there was no one in the house at present but their own party.

“ O Vy said Mr. Dexter, “ your La’ship need be under no apprehensions—you may depend on it, he won’t so easily lose sight of persons of such evident rank and fashion. This is all a little stage trick to excite curiosity:

Ï am certain I have seen him before.— If I mistake not, he was with a party of strolling players at Ballynogue ; that description of persons has always a sort of a--kind of a—jargon that

they pick out of the plays of the cele-. brated Shakespeare and others, which they pass for their own.”

“ You are quite wrong, Mr. Dexter,” said Lady Singleton ; but in a tone of voice which evinced that his opinion had made some impression on her.

tc Certainly, if you say it, I must be wrong, Lady Singleton ; and, indeed, 1 only hinted my opinion and belief with due deference to your Ladyship’s.5’ This was strictly true. Mr. Dexter’s mind was a kind of tabula rasa, on which the person to whom he looked up, for the time being, for patronage and preferment, might indite what he pleased. No man exhibited more signs of intelligence on his own interests, yet the jargon of Lady Singleton, no less than her rank, had imposed her on him for a person of considerable influence and interest : with the power

and consequence of her brother, he was deepiy impressed; and, like ail persons who have seen the great only at a distance, he thought they could do every thing for those whom they protected, and that those whom they protected had nothing to do but to flatter and submit, in order to obtain every thing they desired.

The ramblers, on their return to the inn, found Mr. Yandaleur full of the importance and success of hi? office-. The venison was u done to a turn ” and a boat full of excellent fish had been landed in time for dinner. Everybody was pleased-—every body was in high spirits ; and their ramble and adventure with “ Peter the Great P as Lady Florence called him, afforded subject matter for conversation for the evening. While they took their coffee, the innkeeper was summoned to stand the test of their inquiries relative to the

singular stranger, whom Lady Single-ton insisted on it spoke with a foreign accent.

44	In glide troth then/5 said Mr. Me. Donald, 44 I warrant ye weei, Ms my Lord’s aine gentleman, tor my Lord is now in the country, and mounseer looks • as like a lord as his self; and he is a great fisherman, and has his own nice wee boat that he paddles about in/* Mr. Dexter smirked, wriggled on his chair, and threw a glance under his eyes at Lady Singleton ; but seeing nothing in her countenance to sanction his smirk or his wriggle, he looked grave, and was composed again.

This information rather startled the whole party, with the exception of Mr. Glentworth, who exclaimed : —

44 No: the person we have met is a gentleman, and a gentleman of distinguished manners and appearance: there can be no question about it.”

44 Weel, I just doubt we have ony,

the like, in these parts, and if he’s a gentleman, he has not put up at the Castle, that’s all.”

With this observation, Mr. Me. Donald withdrew, and shortly after the party retired, in the intention of setting off the next morning with the sun, as by the advice of Mr. Me. Donald they meant to reach their last stage to the Giant’s Causeway on the following night, and sleep at Bush-Mills; the point from which most of the votarists to this great shrine of nature start for the pilgrimage.

t

CHAPTER 6

. \

The travellers recommenced their journey on the following day, while the grey vapours of a fine autumnal morning still involved every object in their misty hue; till the sun, as he appeared to rise from the brightening bosom of the ocean, gradually developed the bold features of that great sweep which terminates in the mighty altitudes of the Basaltic promontory of Benmore. The stage, however, performed before breakfast, is generally that least favorable to picturesque observations ; and the venerable ruins of Kerragh Castle, the bold promontory ofTorr, crowned with its

Giant's Fort and Grave,* the magni* ficent spectacle afforded by the ocean and surrounding mountains, were alike lost upon tlie drowsy tourists* Their attention and interest were first awakened by the sight of a good breakfast at the town of Ballycastle, which their avant-coureur had ordered for them the night before.

As they had here some time on their hands, while the horses were resting. Lady Singleton proposed that they should employ it in visiting whatever was best worth seeing in or about the town, and the local knowledge of their host was put into requisition to obtain the necessary intelligence.

* Torr, a hill or tower. The ruins of the Fort of Dunavarrc may be seen on the point of the promontory of Torr, and is said by the - people of the country to have been the work of giants. At some distance above it, is shewn a spot called Sleacht-na-Barrvgh—the Giant'» Grave.

*SM *•».	,	.<*■	...V

» _ *

t ’	«A	•

Ÿwm

I

•	V	#

■ <» %—■ * •*

’ . •• *

— -■ ■ «.

-t	*	•.	•	«►	•	—• l—^

Dubh-na-valone, was still to be seen.” t; And what was she famous for?” asked Lady Singleton. fC I rather doubt a nun's claim to celebrity.,J>

The innkeeper had never heard, excepting that she was a great prophetess, and a saint and abbess of the place.*

* Tradition says that this nun had a sister, whom she had occasion to blame for some impropriety of conduct ; and though the offender had shewn ample contrition, the recluse would not be satisfied. It happened, however, that the penitent had occasion one wintry night to beg shelter from her sister, who could not, from Christian motives, deny her request; but resolved, rather than abide under the same roof, to pay her accustomed devotions in the open air. After remaining some hours at prayer, the devout woman looked towards the cell, and saw a most brilliant light. Struck with amazement, knowing that neither fire nor taper had burnt there for many months, she approached the bed on which lier sister lay, but only had time to hear her sigh out her last breath in praise of her

Lady Singleton, having asserted that it must be all a mistake, as she knew the Calender of Saints pretty well, and no such name as Saint Shelagh was among them, she complied, notwithstanding;, with the wishes of the rest of

O 7

the party, to visit this ruined abbey, whose curiosity this little legendary morceau of the innkeeper’s had awakened and interested.

The day was fine, though somewhat gloomy; and the abbey was but a short walk from the town. Lady Florence, supported by her two friends, Mr. Vandaleur and Colonel Moclere, followed the rest of the group, which was led on by Lady Singleton and

Redeemer. The light had vanished—the recluse considered it as the sign of Heaven’s forgiveness to her sister, and learned henceforward to be more indulgent to human frailty.

I have borrowed this note from Dr. Drummond’s beautiful poem of u the Giant’s Causes way.”

Mr. Dexter—-the former ringing the changes upon the dullness and inactivity of a monastic life ; and the latter bearing testimony to the truth and justice of her observations.

The abbey of Bona-Marga, founded in the sixteenth century by one of the Me. Donald family, an ancestor of the Earls of Antrim, was among the last of the monasteries founded in Ireland : it had still, however, felt heavily the decaying hand of time. The cells and refectorv had long fallen into un-

4/	O

distinguishable dilapidation: the chapel alone appeared tolerably preserved, and still faintly exhibited some well-executed devices in bas-relief. A small edifice also remained near the great entrance to the chapel, which might have been the lodge of the convent porter, or the detached residence of some jay-brother. Nothing perhaps could be more incongruous to the solemn scene of this venerable ruin, than the

group which now intruded on its silent solitudes. The desolate wildness of its site5 the turbulent ocean it commanded, the rocks, cliffs, and mountains, by which it was environed, the death-like stillness which hung upon it, the • mortal relics strewed around, were grand and gloomy images, strongly contrasted by the flippant loquacity, rapid motions, and gay appearance -of its unusual visitants. Lady Florence, trailing the drapery of an Indian shawl, which breathed of Indian roses, over the long rye-grass that rustled above the consecrated earth, where perhaps,

H Many a saint, and many a hero lay,”

talked of the place, its wildness, and its gloom, with romantic enthusiasm ; and throwing her shawl over her head, fold-ing her hands, and placing herself under the arch of a broken aisle, with no feeble effect, repeated:

C£ In each low wind methinks a spirit calls, And more than echoes talk along these walls |Lf

then suddenly dropping her air and tone, she assumed a look of Becky ish simplicity, leaving it doubtful whether her abrupt transition was the bye-play of affected coquetry, or the impulse of unaffected folly. Whatever it was, it appeared to enchant her two supporters, between whom she again took her station. Meantime the Misses Singletons were endeavouring to read an inscription on a tomb-stone, upon which Mr. Dexter lay sprawling, assisting them to decipher it; but skipping over the Latin, which occasionally obtruded itself, and declaring the whole thing put him in mind of the celebrated Mr* Gray’s Elegy on a Country Churchyard in Elegant Extracts, which began with—

({ What beckoning ghost-”

Miss O’Halloran stood silently bye, neither

(i Touch’d, nor rapt, nor waken’d, nor inspired,”

and Lady Singleton was endeavouring to convince Mr. Glentworth that the founder of the abbey was wholly mistaken in the site he had chosen ; for that she could, at that moment, point out twenty other situations, in every respect preferable.

“ Very likely,’* returned Mr. Glentworth : “ and since, my dear, I cannot possibly wish that you had lived some centuries back, I wish the old abbot was here, at this moment present, to benefit by your criticism, lest he should, in some beatific vision, dictate the site of a future monastery to some future founder.”

He had scarcely uttered the words, when Lady Singleton, with a scream, exclaimed :

How can you talk such nonsense, Mr. Glentworth ? I really thought I yoL. i.	i

saw a tall figure gliding among the old ruins.3*

“ Well,” lie returned, laughing, fC ’tis you who have conjured up the old Abbot of Bona Marga. ’’

Mr. Dexter, who had jumped on his feet upon hearing Lady Singleton’s scream, and who now, at a cautious distance, went poking about the chapel ruin, started hack in alarm, exclaiming; “ Egad though, there is somebody there.”

The stranger’s gigantic dog bounded forward ; and the next moment, the stranger himself, with the air of one who is obliged to make Ids appearance malgré lui, advanced from among the ruins.

He saluted the party politely, but distantly, and calling his dog to him, seemed as if he would have passed on ; when Mr. G lent worth, advancing with a cordial smile to meet him, prevented the intention. The rest of the party,

whose opinions floated between the opposite impressions made on their minds, by his distinguished air and figure, and by the account, of ce my Lord's gentleman" from Mr, Mc. Donald, kept a little aloof. Their curio» sity, however, was strongly excited, and their first prepossession in his favor was increased by a more perfect view of his countenance than the twilight of the preceding evening had afforded.

“ You have got the start of us, Sir/* said Mr. Glen t worth, though we fan-vied ourselves pretty early travellers ; for we began our journey with the sun.5'

“ I had finished mine, Sir, I fancy,” said the stranger, before either your party or the sun had commenced their’s,

55 1 travelled with a less resplendent companion/5 he added smiling: 46 and set off at midnight with the man in the moon.”

“ Pray, Sir/* asked Mr. Dexter, riggling up to him, “ does any cheap mode of conveyance, any stage or mail, run between New Town Glens and Ballycastle ?”

“ Not that I know of, Sir,*" returned the stranger, coldly.

“ I beg pardon ; I merely asked for information: for I took it for granted you were a resident in these parts.” The stranger made no reply ; and Mr. Dexter, looking archly at Lady Florence and the Colonel, continued with unabated pertness :. “ 1 fancy, Sir, you had rather a cool ride along the coast last night: it was a sharp

easterly-----”

“ I did not ride, Sir,” returned the stranger.

“ Not ride! indeed, Sir! well your walk kept you warm at least.”

“ I did not walk. Sir,” returned the stranger, fastening his dog's collar, which had loosened.

“ Not walk ! ha—odd enough ! If it would not seem impertinent, I should like, just merely for information’s sake, to know how you did perform that extremely bad stage: no offence, Sir, I hope.”

The stranger raised his head, and rolling his dark eyes over the insignificant figure of his pert interrogator, replied: “None intended, Sir, I hope/’ “None in the world, Sir; none iu the world,^ rejoined Mr. Dexter, shrinking back, and whispering Lady Singleton, while Mr Glentworth addressed the stranger upon the subject of the interesting scene they occupied.

“ Your Ladyship may depend upon it,” observed Mr. Dexter, “ that Mr Me. Donald is right : for you observe, now, that his accent is quite foreign/*

“ Foreign, or not foreign/* said Lady Singleton, who never adopted the opinion of another, “ he is a gentleman. Lam not to be deceived : as Ninon used

T ».

to say : “ Sur ce chapitre on peut raporter a moi.’5

66 Unquestionably/’ said Mr. Dexter, while Lady Florence stood in whispering consultation with her beaux, on the subject of the stranger's gentility.

Lady Singleton interrupting his tête* à-tête with Mr. Glentworth by advancing towards him, and addressing him with some cordiality, regretting that they had not the pleasure of his company at dinner on the preceding evening:’' We made an effort for it, however/' said Lady Florence, advancing, with one of her soft smiles, and seizing on the sanction of Lady Singleton's authority to gratify her own inclination—'“ the gentleman, however, to whom we entrusted the embassy, had not the good fortune to overtake you.’ The stranger bowed his thanks to both ladies, and replied, that he had immediately returned to Ills boat.

“ At so late an hour?’* asked Lady Singleton.

tc Over the mere rambler, Madam,” returned the stranger, smiling, “ Time holds no jurisdiction; he is the slave of the elements, and must submit to be governed by a cloud or a sun-beam: the wind, weather, and tide were so much in my favor last night, that I joined a convoy of fishermen, and anchored with their little fleet, about midnight, in the Bay of Ballycastle. I was repaid, however, for the exertion, by having enjoyed the prospect of some fine coast scenery, under the greatest possible advantages of light and shade, from the circumstance of a bright moon, and a quantity of massy clouds drifted along the atmosphere by a vigorous sea-breeze.”

“ I should imagine/' said Mr. Glent-worth, Sf that the whole region would be best seen from the sea.”

Unquestionably," replied the

T A

stranger, if the season is favorable ; but a formidable sea, agitated by ihe western winds, which sweep over the Atlantic, frequently rolls along these shores, and renders it unpleasant, and indeed sometimes unsafe, to coast them-”

This observation led to some questions on the part of Mr. Gientworth, who informed the stranger of their intended route, and requested his advice. The stranger gave it with promptitude ; and in detailing the objects best worth attention, unaffectedly exhibited an intimate acquaintance with natural science, and a very correct taste for the picturesque and grand styles in the higher order of landscape. Meantime Mr. Dexter, after many fruitless efforts, succeeded in drawing away Lady Singleton and Lady Florence, leaving Miss OTIalloran, who stood behind Mr. Gientworth, sole audi-tress.

»

“ I took the liberty of drawing you

away, Lady Singleton/' he said, “ just to mention to you, that that person, who is talking by rote something he has read in a road book, is neither more nor less than a gentleman's servant.”

“ Impossible !” cried the ladies in a breath.

“ Very likely, Lady Singleton, but I believe it is true, nevertheless ; for the Colonel and I, on examining the dog’s collar, have discovered on it a crest and a coronet ; so that in fact the dog must belong to the man’s master, for the Earl himself would not be vagabondizing about the country in a shabby jacket, without servants, horses, equipages ; and herding with filthy fishermen. All this, in my humble opinion, proves that Mr. Me. Do-nald was correct, and that this person is my Lord's valet.”

“ Not a bit of it,” said Lady Sin-I 5

gleton : “ he is some Irish nobleman or, at all events, by his distinguished air, address, and manner, he is not a person, nècfhier

“ Critically/’ replied Mr. Dexter, and followed the ladies back to the stranger, whose conversation with Mr* Glentworth he abruptly interrupted with—

u Upon my word, Sir, that dog of your’sis a charming fine animal ; very fine indeed:-—a curious old collar enough; quite an antique; rather *usty, but the crest is plainly to be seen—a cross; the crest of some Catholic family, I presume, Sir?”

" When that crest was adopted, Sir,, by many illustrious families in Europe** there were none other but Catholics in Christendom/’ replied the stranger, coldly,

“ indeed. Sir! Hem! that must have been a long, time back, indeed, Sire1"

11 No, Sir, not so verij long,’* returned the stranger, dryly.

And here, I think, is an Earl’s coronet,” continued Mr. Dexter, drawing the dog to him, ft and some letters not very plain. Pray, Sir, to whom does this very fine animal belong?’'

“ To me^Sir” returned the stranger, haughtily, and raising his voice.

“ Indeed, Sir; sol thought ; so at , least I presumed : a fine animal indeed—very fine.”

Lady Singleton now expressed æ wish to examine the collar.

“ 1 haye some right to understand antiquities of all sorts,” she said: “ £ have lived ail my life among these kind of things.*’

The stranger took off the collar, which was of brass, very massively and curiously wrought ; it bore date 1605, and under an earl’s coronet was traced in legible Roman characters — Tir-

CONNELL.

“ It is an old iamilyreiic, said the stranger, “ and has lineally descended from father to son, till it came into my hands.*’

“ Then,” said Lady Singleton, “ 1 presume we are addressing the present Earl of Tirconnell, a title well known on the continent ?”

“ No, Madam,” replied the stranger, reddening : “ the title has long passed out of my family. I have no claim to it, whatever, though lineally descended from the first Earl. My name is O' DonneU*

He moved his cap,and bowed gracefully round as he thus announced himself, probably for the purpose of avoiding any further interrogatories.

“ And mine, Sir,*’ said Mr. Glent-worth, bowing in his turn, 14 is Glent-worth.’’ He then, with the true politeness of good feeling, presented each individual of his party, in turn, to the stranger, not even forgetting the

generally forgotten Miss O Halloran, who dropt an awkward courtesy, and set the Misses Singletons and their friend Mr. Dexter tittering.

u By the bye, Mr. (^Donnel,’’ said Lady Singleton, “ I knew a person of your name in Florence, above twenty years back, when my brother was envoy extraordinary at Leopold’s court, when he was Grand Duke of Tuscany/'

Very possible/* Madam, said the stranger: “ the O’Donnel family is but too much distributed they are at this moment leaders in the armies of almost every great state but their own/'

* The fate of many branches of this ancient Irish family is alluded to in Mr. Moore’s beautiful and characteristic poetry in the Irish Melodies.

Ye Blakes and O’JDonneZs, whose fathers resign’d The green hills of your youth, among strangers to find That repose which at home you had sought for imrain, Sic.

“ Yes,” said Lady Singleton, t£ Jtis a good name on the continent : there are the Spanish general^ and the Austrian generals, O’Donnel ; but the person I mean was an Irishman of fortune; who made a sensation in Florence by losing his estate in two games of hazard to a certain English duke, whose name I shall not mention, as he happens to be my particular friend : O’Donnel only survived his loss three days: it was said he died of a broken heart. Was he any relation of vour’s, Mr. O’Donnel ?”

“■ The person }^our Ladyship alludes to/' returned the stranger, changing colour, £* was, I believe, my relation.

Mr. Glentworth, who perceived the stranger’s emotion, and who suspected it might arise from the disappointment of expected inheritance, endeavoured to prevent Lady Singleton from pursuing the subject, by observing that *

he thought the title of Tirconneil was in the Irish family of the Talbots,*

“ About the period marked on that collar,” returned the stranger, “ Hugh O’Donne!, the celebrated chief of Tir-connell, fled, after the battle of Kin-sale, to Spain, where he died. His brother Roderick took possession of the territories of Tirconneil ; did homage to King James i.f and received the patent of an English Earldom, on ceding

the title of his Irish chieftancy, to the

/

great annoyance of the rest of his family. A few years afterwards, his

* The title has since been given at pleasure to the family of Fitzwilliam, and a few years back ivas bestowed by his present Majesty on Central Carpenter,

•f The letter of King James to the Irish chief on granting him the patent is extremely curious : it is on the Irish rolls. Through the kindness of Sir William Betharn Ulster, King at Arms, I ha-re been permitted to get a copy.-—See note at the end of this volume.

possessions fell, with the five escheated counties of Ulster, to the King. Earl Roderick fled to Spain, and he patent of his Earldom became cancelled. It was again revived in favor of a branch of the Talbot family ; but from that family also it has long since passed by forfeiture:	for/’ he added, smiling,

“ titles in Ireland are uncertain tenures; happily, however, high descent and antiquity of blood are beyond the reach of forfeiture ; as independence of mind and integrity of principle are beyond the reach of high sounding names to confer, or of power to take away or to bestow.’*

“ All very true,” returned Mr. Glentvvorth, while Mr. Dexter whispered in Miss Singleton’s ear, that that was a passage from “ Elegant Extracts”

The party now descended towards the shore; and Mr. Glentvvorth, every moment more prepossessed in the

stranger’s favor, asked him if Bally-castle was his head quarters ; and if they had any chance of his society at the Giant’s Causeway the following day. The stranger evasively replied, that he had no fixed plan, and that his movements were uncertain, but that it was his intention to devote that day to the beautiful semicircular sweep between the majestic promontory of Ben-more, and the Basaltic rock of Carrick-a-rede ; a fine feature on the coast towards the Giant’s Causeway. The Causeway, however, he said, he had already twice visited, and he thought should not again explore : adding, with the air of a man who sought an excuse to part from his company, without committing a breach of good manners by betraying his desire:—

“ The person from whom I have hired a sailing-boat is waiting for me amongst the rocks, where he has anchored my little barge, while I took a

view of these ruins.iy He pointed a» he spoke to a boat, whose fittle streamer floated gaily on the breeze. “ In a few minutes/’ he added, bowing, “ the society I have the honor to enjoy will change the character of the gratification I derive from it, by forming a picturesque group in the distant view of my land prospect/’

Without wishing to spoil your view/’ said Mr. Glentworth, laughing, “ I should prefer being the companion of your voyage.”

“ You are not singular in that wish/1 said Lady Florence, smiling; “ and Lady Singleton and I have been just expressing our desire, a la dérobé, that we could capture the vessel and commander for the morning.”

44 If your Ladyship condescends to make the attempt,” returned the stranger, “ no glory will be attached to an enterprise to which no resistance will be made. The boat and its

commander are equally at your ser« vice.”

Though this was said with the ease of a man in the habit of saying such things., yet it wanted that ardor and cordiality of look and manner which should’have marked its sincerity. Mr. Glentworth was so forcibly struck by the apparent diiemma to which he had reduced the stranger’s politeness, that he was about decidedly to decline the offer, when Lady Singleton decidedly accepted of it.

44 This is an amazingly good idea,” she said. “ We shall have an opportunity of seeing Benmore; and you can put us on shore whenever we please, Mr. O’Donnel.”

44 Undoubtedly, Madam/’ he replied, but with an air of absence.

44 And as to our getting in late at Bush-Mills, there is a brilliant moonlight; so we will follow you if you please.”

Left without an alternative, the stranger led the way, and the party in a few moments reached the rocky beach, where the boat lay anchored. Some sea^water had got into it, and the man in attendance on the stranger was busy in emptying it out with his brogue, which he put on his foot the moment after, to the great amusement of the spectators.

The stranger, thus unwarily drawn in to belong to a party, which it was evident he had tried to avoid, seemed however to turn the necessity of the case to the best account he could. Active, as vigorous, he towed the little vessel into a creek, where it was most accessible to the ladies, covered the seat destined for them with a large watch cloak ; and, as they objected to the sail, at first launching took an oar himself, requesting any one of the gentlemen to take the other, that they might not be incommoded with his own

boatman. Before any of the gentlemen could accept or decline the offer, Lady Singleton had issued her command to Mr. Dexter.

44 Come, Mr. Dexter,she cried, 44 you know you are to have command of the pleasure-boat you are getting built for me, for the lake at Ballynogue : you shall now give me a specimen of your nautical performance—-this is an excellent opportunityY

Mr. Dexter, with real reluctance, but affected readiness, took the oar. Brail couched at his master’s feet, and the gaily freighted vessel put off from shore—-Mr. Glentworth and the ladies much pleased with the adventure; the Colonel and Mr. Yandaleur, with their usual apathetic philosophy, resigned to their fate ; and Mr. Dexter disappointed that his hints and suspicions of the stranger had gone for nothing, and mortified and annoyed by the instructions and reproofs he re-

ceived from Lady Singleton, who frequently took the oar out of his hand, to shew, by example» how it ought to be plied. He appeared, nevertheless, the most satisfied of the party ; his louring brow alone contradicting the evidence of his obsequious smile, to such as observed its involuntary testimony.

Meantime the stranger, whose graceful figure, threw into exertion, ex hi» bited a model of muscular force, proved himself

u No lounging landsman, laboring at the oar;'»

and apparently more animated than fa-tigued by an exercise which seemed familiar to him, he continued to converse with less reserve of manner than he had hitherto done, sometimes with the ladies, sometimes with Mr. Glent-worth, but never with the two gentlemen, who had neither of them vet addressed him, and who sat with their

eyes half closed, as if not quite deter-mined whether they should or should not fall asleep.

The day was breathlessly still, and the cairn unruffled waters presented a glassy surface of one broad sheet of silver light. But notwithstanding this apparent smoothness, a majestic swell, heaving grandly forward, seemed at times to threaten danger to the little bark, which did not in reality exist ; for the long-rolling wave was only dangerous near the coast, where, broken and fretted by the rocks, it threw back its spray in columns of foam.

The ladies, at first intimidated, were gradually re-assured by the stranger, who took the best method of quieting their fear, by diverting their attention from its object.

Resting on his oar, he suffered the boat to float on the current towards the promontory of Bemnore and as he

* B$nmore—*t\kc great head, as Psnmanmawr.

directed their attention to the wild waste of Basaltic columns, which, like some stupendous colonade of art, spread beneath the mountain’s towering heights, he observed to Mr. Glent-worth, that he had ascended the promontory, from the land, to examine its gigantic architecture, in detail ; but that to judge of its altitude and extent, its true character of wild and savage sublimity, he perceived it must be viewed from the sea. “ As we now contemplate it,” he added, at this favorable distance, with its enormous Basaltic columns, and bold but formless precipices, it presents no faint image of the debris of some little world, which had become the sport of elementary revolution.”

The Colonel whispered Lady Florence—u Quite Pindaric!” and Mr. Glentworth enquired if' any measurement had been made of its elevation.

The stranger replied-, that he understood its altitude, including the base, measured six hundred and thirty-one

i	*

feet; that he had himself, on examination, found its pillars separable into smaller columns ; the line of contact being obvious in some of the broken joints.

Lady Singleton observed, in direct opposition to her former opinion on the shores of the Red Bay (because .weary of not observing something), that • it reminded her so strongly of Mount Vesuvius, that she was pretty certain Benmore had been a volcano3 though she supposed nobody had had the industry or ingenuity to discover it.

“ Your Ladyship, then,” said the stranger, 44 is a disciple of the volcanic doctrine, and hold a belief in the identity of lava and basalt/’

Lady Singleton smiled, and said : 44 Why, I happen to know something of these things, having lived in volcanic

countries ; and I dare say, Mr. O’Dou-nel, you and I should agree very well on these subjects. You have been a good deal abroad yourself, I suspect ; have been, perhaps, at Vesuvius?” “No, Madam, never at Vesuvius, sufficiently at least to examine it; but I understand there are some Basaltic pillars to be found at Mount /Etna.” Lady Singleton immediately began a description of Mount /Etna ; in which she was interrupted by Lady Florence, who called the stranger’s attention to a remarkable fissure in the side of the promontory, with an arch formed over it by the accident of a fallen pillar, and which her Ladyship, in a plaintive voice, observed, seemed to threaten destruction to some wretched person passing underneath it.

The stranger assured her there was not the smallest danger; and added, that that fissure was called, in the language of the country, Cmsa?i~un-Ffiier

Leith; or the Grey Man’s Path: but that the tradition which gave it the name was lost. “ The person, for whom your Ladyship’s fears are excited, is most likely some peasant-sportsman, coming in search of eagles' eggs, which are frequently found among these pillared cliffs. Numerous birds, indeed, build among the rocks on this coast, whose eggs afford a luxurious sustenance to the neighbouring fishermen, and would enrich the menûs of more sumptuous tables.”

u Indeed !** said Mr. Yandaleur, raising himself, and for the first time opening his lips since the commencement of the little voyage : “ And pray, Sir, is there any game in this place worth speaking of?”

“ A great abundance, Sir—Flame et Voile, the barnacle of this coast, the most delicate, perhaps, of the duck tribe, is particularly fine, and in the

k 2

Almanach has plus de-suc et d esprit, than almost any bird I know.’*

“ I perceive, Sir^ said Mr. Vanda* lenr, and his countenance heightened into intelligence, £f I perceive that you speak cn amateur.”

“ I do not merit that distinction,

y

Sir,” replied the stranger, smiling;

£t but I have lived where those things were understood.”

“ In France, perhaps ?’’ asked Mr. Vandaleur.

The stranger bowed assent.

“ In Paris ?” he. added, with new interest.

Many years,” replied the stranger.

“ Then, Sir,” he returned with a sigh, u you have lived in the only place where the gastronomic science is really understood, and brought to perfection; though I am told it shared in the general shock of the Revolution: not but we owe some excellent things to

juun it	* tf	I

the nineteenth century. All the scmiès an supreme, foï’ instance, are strictly revolutionary dishes; but they cannot compensate for the blanc-mangers of the old regime. I don’t believe you would find one French cook in London, equal to the veau a la creme : far, indeed, are they better off in Paris, as 1 understand.”

“ The secret, however, I believe/’ returned the stranger, smiling, 66 is still preserved in Languedoc, where it originated, and where I have often feasted on the various blanc-mangers of Montpelier.”

“ You are a fortunate man, Sir,” replied Mr. Vandaleur emphatically.

“ Besides/’ continued the stranger, in the same tone of pieasantry, “ w« have come at the mysteries of Périgord, since the - revolution : every restaurateur in Paris can now trufer son dindeP “ So 1 understand,” returned Mr,

k 3

1 V W	V/	JL/	V/	A	1	Al	AJ	—	V

Vandaleur, with great seriousness.— c< Pray, Sir, had you ever the good fortune to eat of any of the dinès-bruns, of Robert Raine? I am sure he is, out and out, the first artist of the age/’

“ I cannot say I have, Sir/* replied the stranger: “ but I have tasted the petits poix, of the celebrated Morillon ; the dish which made his fortune, when he was but a simple restaurateur of the second class.M

“ Indeed !” said Mr. Vandaleur. “ We had Morillon fils for some time in town. He came over on speculation to found his own school here: but he had too much science for the bcef-steak and turtle palates of the English. I thought, myself, he was deficient in imagination. When vou eat

O	v

of one of his dinners, you eat of all: however, his Epigram de Pagneau must render his name immortal, if he never had dressed another dish. His fish

sallacî toc, with green jell}7, was good, but inferior to the Bayonesc of my own cook, du Buisson.”

During thisreconditedialogue, which had impressed Mr. Vandaleur with a high respect for the stranger, as being one who had sal at good men’s feasts, Lady Florence and the Colonel were exchanging looks of sly derision; Mr. Glentworth was listening, much amused; and Lady Singleton, who never lis* ienedj and never was amused by any conversation but her own> was haranguing Mr. Dexter and her daughters

o o	_	o

on the subject of volcanos, waters, and eruptions, rivers of flame, and beds of lavas : in which scientific tirade she was interrupted by Mr. Glentworth, who proposed the hoisting of a sail, and their tacking for the Bay of Ballycastle;

* as it was now full time they should recommence their land journey.

“ But, Mr. CLDonnel,” said Lady Singleton, “ what is there to prevent

JL 4

us coasting with you, as far as Garrick* a-rede, and having our carriages to meet us there? We shall have the benefit of better prospects, and of your information on the subject of these shores at the same time: and we go on with our journey, you know, all the same/1

“ My dear Lady Singleton,” interrupted Mr. Glentworth, in some embarrassment, 41 this is taking a very unfair advantage of Mr, O’Donnel’s politeness: indeed, we must not think of intruding further upon his time and pursuits/*

The stranger returned his offers of service with the same politeness he had first made them, though not with more ardor; and it was agreed that the party should proceed by water to the little sea-port village of BaHinton/y near Car-rick-a-rede, where their carriages should meet them. To insure this arrangement, a fisherman, who was preparing

his nets at no great distance from their boat, was^ hailed; and consented for a trifle to carry their orders back to the Mr. Glentvvorth therefore wrote on the back of a letter to his own man the necessary directions. As Mr. Dexter was handing them to the fisherman, he threw an expression of disgust into his countenance, and before the poor man was out of hearing, exclaimed:

64 Bless my soul! a savage-looking fellow : what a filthy beast !”

44 Why you don’t really expect, Mr. Dexter/5 said Lady Florence, with an ironical smile, 44 that a poor Irish fisherman is to be such a spruce, neat, nice-looking person, as you are yourself.”

44 No, Lady Florence, I don't expect that, nor any thing like that, but I should at least wish to see the same cleanliness and courtesy which is so remarkable in the English peasantry. But the fact is so far from this, that

the lower Irish are not a degree removed from the beasts they live with. They are perfect savages, and quite brutal in their manners, except when their cunning teaches them better. I think, Lady Singleton, I may be allowed an opinion on the subject; for I know a little of them”

44 I know a little of them too,’’ observed the stranger, 44 and I must beg leave to differ extremely in opinion with you, Sir.”

441 can scarcely think that possible,” said Mr. Dexter, 44 if you really know their ways well, Mr. O’Donnel.”

44 It is nevertheless true,” said the stranger, coolly, taking his seat at the helm, and steering for Carrick-a-rede. “ The habits of the genuine Irish peasants are, it is true, those of poverty and degradation—destitute of all the comforts of life, sometimes of its necessaries, they are negligent of order and cleanliness; but with their habits of

life (the natural results of the former state of the country, and of their own penurious modes of existence), their conduct and manners bear no comparison ; and so far are they from exhibiting in either, the ferocity of savage, or the -rude and uncivilized life, that they are, perhaps, the most courteous peasantry of modern Europe. Long submission, indeed, to inevitable and conscious degradation, has almost given them a servile deference of manners towards their superiors : but it is impossible not to lament, that their natural tendency to civilization should not have operated under a happier influence, and taken a better and more independent direction.”

“ I am very much inclined to agree with you, Mr. O’Donne],” said Mr. Glentworth. “ I have an estate in this country, which I have only visited for the first time, a few months back; but I must say, that from the little I have

seen of the lower orders of the natives,

I am greatly prepossessed in their favor. Their shrewdness may sometimes pass for, and sometimes approach to, cunning; the natural quality of a people, who long had nothing but address to oppose to force, or to disarm oppression ; but as far as my own dealings have gone with them, I have found them more acute than over-reaching ;

c . 7

more tenacious of guarding their own rights than of infringing on mine. With respect to their manners, they are quite a solecism in the character of a people so situated.* Indeed, I have often

* In this opinion I am borne out by the testimonies of the agent of more than one great Eng- _ )ish landholder in Ireland, who from their situations hare the best opportunities of knowing the lower orders. The English who visit, and the English who arc resident in the country, arc almost always lier w’armest eulogists, and best friends : and it is too certain, that the revilers of Ireland must not be sought for among strangers.

thought their extreme civility borders upon servility ; and., to English ears, at least, their strong and exaggerated encomiums give no very favorable opinion of their sincerity.

“ Apropos, we met a very genuine Irishman indeed, in the little town of • Glenarm, who certainly shewed himself deeply versed in all the small courtesies’’ of life, and who was as prodigal of his Sirs, and his Madams, of your Honor, and your Ladyship3 as the people of this province are frugal of such epithets of distinction. I think he told us his name was Me. Rory. His manner, look, and accent, were extremely amusing.0 During this observation, the stranger had risen to arrange the sail ; but he replied, when again seated at the helm : “ There is certainly a strong line of demarkation between the peasantry of this and the other provinces : they are indeed, from obvious causes, a distinct race of

people; being chiefly, though not universally, descendants of the remoter Scotch colonists, settled here by King James I. National, like individual adversity, tends, perhaps, to nurture the sensibility which it bruises ; and the acme of Irish suffering had been passed before the Scotch colonists were put into tranquil possession of the soil. Their existing descendants resemble their progenitors, and are thrifty and laborious ; and their defect of manner is balanced by a bold sense of rights, inseparable from their Presbyterian creed. I do not, however, find that the very low classes are better educated than the same order of persons in the other provinces.”

£4 So much the better, Sir,” said Mr. Dexter, rubbing his hands; 44 though certainly their being Presbyterians and not Papists would make all the difference ; for, it is my opinion, that when the lower order of Irish are educated,

and get ideas, and all that sort of thing, there is an end of the country ; nothing but bloodshed and rebellion can ensue. And this, I believe, is the opinion of all rational and loyal men

ce This is, indeed. Sir,” said the strangér, u a very novel effect of education ; and this singular re-action of its influence upon the people must be peculiar to this country. In the land, whose shores we can now almost discern, it has not, I believe, been found so great an evil.**

“ Certainly not,3* said Mr. Glent-worth : “ the Scotch peasantry are at once the most enlightened, and most peaceable, the most industrious, and most loyal peasantry of Europe. But I think, Mr. Dexter, you do not perceive the indirect libel of your observation upon the government, to which you are, I know, so sincerely attached. The purpose of education is to fit us for the enjoyment of civil rights, by mould-

R

-s»	—	-	-	■

L *

-

♦ ~

evince, that the age of public igno- \ ranee is the age of fanaticism ; and fanaticism, to whatever point it directs its fatal zeal, must necessarily lead to anarchy and misrule ; and consequently to the subversion of natural rights, and the dissolution of natural affections. In fact, public ignorance is the true source of public vice; and for my own part, I have always thought less highly of Franklin, for having drawn down fire from Heaven, than for the moral light he laboured to diffuse over the darkness of the vulgar mind. For, as Bacon observes : “ Man is but what he knovv-efh,” and if knowledge is power in the abstract, it is not less virtue; and its direct tendency, therefore, can alone be happiness.”

“ I must beg leave to differ with you in opinion, Sir,” said Mr. Dexter, pertly:

“ so far from knowledge being power, or any thing !,ke it, I believe we al! know, that the poets in all times have been

as poor as church mice; and I fancy, if they had power, poor fellows, they would not starve in their garrets. Indeed, I know of no instance in which knowledge and power go together, except in our Bishops, who certainly are powerful and learned both; though no poets. But, Sir, to turn your argument against yourself, if knowledge is power, that is the very reason why the Irish should get none; for then we should have catholic members of parliament, judges and generals, and then there is an end for ever of our glorious constitution, and the glorious ascendancy, and all that sort of thing, as I may say.”

No constitution can be more glorious,” said Mr. Glentworth, perceiving a look of indignant contempt in the eyes of the stranger, “ than that, which, free from exclusions by equal laws, equal protection, and equal privileges, engages every member of the com mu-

nity in the interests, defence, and preservation of the whole.”

It is indeed/’ said the stranger, cc an odd paradox, a most irrational expectation, that a participation in the blessings of good government, and a share in the conduct o’f the state, should dispose any set of men the more readily to conspiracy and rebellion. If these afford objects of apprehension and anxiety, what should not be feared from the jealousy of the excluded, and the despair of the disqualified.”

“ Undoubtedly/’ said Mr. Glent-worth. And this very ascendancy is not more an evidence of such apprehension, than it is the cause of their propriety. Ascendancy is a relative term; it is an assumption on one part of the population,^ at the immediate expence of the interests, happiness, and und; -. - jted r'ghts of the rest : not a supen hw -lance of power and authority added to the one scale, but a portion

of protection and security taken from the other. Where ascendancy is claimed by one tribe or cast, over others, subsisting under the same government, there is little chance of internal union, or of safety for either party. For duties and rights are inseparable, and the voluntary dereliction of the first, neces- ✓ sari I y implies an abandonment of the second. The surest pledge, therefore, which can be given of the loyalty of the excluded, is their constant and unremitting efforts to be admitted to the rights and privileges of the government under which they live.”

“ Why, undoubtedly, Mr. Glent* worth/' observed Mr. Dexter, obsequiously, “ there is no reason why^o» should not be right, seeing that you are a member of the greatest of all senates; for such I may say it is, except the House of Lords and the Privy Council. But I must say, Sir, with due deference, that the lower Irish are the

most worthless, and, aboveali, themost idle race of—”

“ I must beg leave to deny your assertion, Sir,” interrupted the stranger ; u fora people, who., under circumstances of the greatest hardships, emigrate annually to procure that labour abroad which is denied them at home, cannot naturally he an idle people^ however the means of industry may he denied them.”

“ Poor people!” said Lady Singleton, who had listened with a mixture

of attention and impatience to a con-

0

yersation in which she only waited for an opening to take a part. “ Poor people !	1	am quite of opinion that

they want nothing but manufactories, commerce, and schools, to be a very clever people indeed; and you must know, Mr. O’Donnel, that I mean to establish a bobbin-lace manufactory at Ballynogue. 1 have laid out, too, the ground for two school-houses, to be

conducted upon the Lancasterian system, modified according to some ideas of my own. There is, however a system which sets the Bells and the Lancasters quite in the distance, and which was practised by a German professor at Vienna, when I was there, with great effect. It was termed mnemonics, and was the most expeditious and extraordinary mode of giving instruction that ever was devised. I don’t know how it was done; but it was a most ingenious thing: for, without studying, thinking, or even learning at all (which certainly is a troublesome, slow process), all the languages and all the sciences were taught at once, in a few lectures ; and to a thousand people together, as easily as to one. Now, Mr. Glentworth, I am sure we could make it worth the professor’s while to come to Ballynogue and settle for a time; for, though at Paris, that stupid Dieu-la-Foi, at hi*

vulgar theatre De Vaudeville*, quizzed him most excessively, he was much admired by the Jhnghsh at Vienna. You .may laugh as you will, Mr. Glent-worth, but such a person introduced iu Ireland would be a public benefit to the country.”

“ True,” said Mr. Glentworth, “the professor's system would not.be ill-adapted to the meridian of Ballynogue ; for I remember that it was objected against the mnemonics, that they were injurious to the thinking faculty; an objection which could not apply in our case. For you know, my dear,” he added with a smile, “ that since our arrival, the common people of Ballynogue have been saved the trouble of thinking themselves, by the kind and

* Among the petits pieces brought out by M. Dieu-la-Foi at the theatre Vaudeville, is one in which the character of Professor Fin-Merle bad much success.

constant interior nee of their superiors, ”

'c Jf that be the case,” said Mr. Dexter, “ the re can be no great harm in educating the lower Irish : for, provided no ideas were communicated with their learning, it would alter the whole affair : and, to be sure, it would be a fine thing, to see the whole town and district of Bailynogue civilized, and taught, as I may say, at a blow."

“ That, Sir, js no very new mode of instruction in this country,” said the stranger, no longer able to suppress a laugh, in which he was generally joined by the rest of the party.

46 What Mr. Dexter says, however, is very true,” returned Lady Singleton, vehemently. “ They would without loss of time or labour become well-informed people.”

“ You would make scholars then,” said Mr. Glentworth, laughing, “ of my Irish tenantry, as the Roman mis-

sionaries made Christians of the Saxons; and instruct a parish as they converted a tribe, by one simple act of regeneration.”

46 I have no objection,” said the stranger, to bestow a little of the pro^ fessor’s 'mnemonics upon my countrymen : kindness and attention, whatever direction it takes, will never be thrown away upon them. But, perhaps, in good policy, the first lesson you should teach the Irish, should be the art of forgetfulness/’

VOL. 3U	3»

CHAPTER 7

The boat now glided through tho channel of Slunk na Mavra* The island of Rathlen, or Raghery, rose on the horizon above the wild and turbulent sea, which beats against its inhospitable rocks,

66 Here now,’5 said the stranger, Cfi we may command a perfect view of the ÜICÏNI of Ptolemy, vulgarly called Hackery, or Raahery-Eirin, the “ Fort of Ireland/*

*c lia g her y !" exclaimed Mr. Vanda* leur: tc that is the name of the delicious mutton, which our Irish acquaintance chose to prone"

t£ ’The island is famous for a small

* The hole in the Sea.

breed of sheep, and of horses,1 ‘ returned the stranger : rc and rude and insignificant as it now appears, it was once the scene of much monkish splendour. On it rose the monastery of Columbus, or St. Columb-all, the tutelar saint of these regions, whose rich shrine was ravaged by the piratical Danes. On it, too, still moulder ruins of the castle, which affords i an asylum to the gallant Robert Bruce, during the Scottish wars between him and Boliold Then,, turning to Lady Singleton, he said: iC Your Ladyship may here again find a parallel between the scenery of the Italian and Irish coasts. The channel between Rathjen, and various points of the main-land, are supposed to bear a resemblance to the straits of Reggio, which separate Sicily and Ca? labria; particularly in the indenting of the shores, apd the vortices formed by the counter-currents/’

fC I have those delightful shores,full m L 2

my memory at this moment, and I confess I do not see the resemblance to which you allude,5' said Lady Single-ton.

“ Not in the features of the scenery, perhaps,55 he replied ; “ but the comparison holds good in many points: among others, I may mention that singular phenomenon, the Fata Mor- • gana, which has several times been seen from these shores, and forms nearly as fine a spectacle as in the straits of Reggio.’5

“ I have conversed with many persons who have beheld that extraordinary spectacle,55 said Lady Singleton,

Cf though 1 have not seen it.’5

t£ Nor would it be difficult to find people here to bear testimony to similar magical appearances. Madam:	it	is

indeed the established belief among the common people here, that a green island, covered with groves and gardens, and peopled with gay and busy groups,

rises every seventh year from the waves between this island and the promontory of Bengore, of which we now catch a view/'

This led to a discussion between the stranger and Mr. Glentworth, which had , .the cause of such appearances for its subject, and in which the former shewed no less acquaintance with the pages of Smith and Newton, than to Mr. Vandaleur’s imagination, he had exhibited an intimacy with those of the Commestibles de Paris, and U Almanach des gourmands.

This scientific dialogue was at length however interrupted,, by an exclamation of timidity and surprize from the lips of Lady Florence, who drew the attention of the company to the rude rocks and hanging bridge of Garrick-a-rede, which, though it would have afforded a beautiful feature in an imaginary landscape, exhibited a frightful image in a real scene. The sun was.

'-TV» -V -■'V	>	J	V V/ X * i' JU i-J J

hastening towards the west, and the lengthened shadows of the surrounding rocks were swept over the foreground of the coast, rendering it one broad expanse of massy darkness, save where a rude high cliff, projecting above the rest, caught on its points the rays of the sinking light. Carrick-a-rede, as it arose from the turbulent waves, seemed to have been wrenched, by the rage of some elementary convulsion, from the main-land cliffs, and separated from them by a frightful chasm of unfathomable depth. Between them, the sea foamed with horrid and incessant roar, even when all around was most calm and serene. Yet even amidst this desolation, the hut of some solitary fisherman sent forth its smoke from under the impending rocks ; for even here the senses and imagination submitted to the government of necessity : and the passion of fear, amongst all that could most excite it.

‘vas subdued before the more powerful dictation of imperious interest. Across the frightful interval, which yawned between rock and rock, and at a more awful height, was suspended a light hempen bridge, for the purpose .of facilitating the business of the fish* ermen, and with no security from destruction beyond one single hand-rope, to which from its length no tention could be given, did they pass over the gulf; neither dazzled by the distance beneath them, nor intimidated by the raging of the sea which lashed the rocks at its base. The pilot had steered his little vessel in a direction favorable to the most picturesque view of Carrick-a-rede : and a variety of obser-vations and remarks were offered by each spectator on an object at once so awful and so novel. The hempen bridge, though at the time unoccupied, was not to be viewed without sensations of dread and horror; as it evi-

(lently undulated even to the passing breeze. “ The human figure/* said the stranger, “ has almost a supernatural appearance when seen from the water, on that fanciful and aeriel bridge/’

“ How very unlucky,” said the Colonel, that no accommodating fisherman places himself there for Ic bien du spectacle’’

Mr. Dexter,^ said Lady Singleton, would you be afraid to make the attempt : you may depend upon it there can be no positive danger, since the thing is done every day. I will guarantee that ”

“ But if your Ladyship commands it, though the danger did existas much as it certainly appears to do,” said Mr. Dexter, “ J would not the more hesitate to obey. Only it is very evident (to say nothing of my light weight, which would make destruction inevitable), that it would be impossible to land upon those cliixs among such horrible’

breakers ; and therefore it is useless to attempt it.”

“ I should infinitely prefer/’ said Lady Florence, “ seeing a picturesque figure upon that wonderful bridge to the finest spectacle of the opera. I should not suppose/’ added her Ladyship, .turning her soft eyes on the • stranger, 44 that there now exists a man, who, to gratify a woman’s wishes, would place himself in so perilous a situation; and yet one reads of such things in the old legends and romances. tame paladin of a preux chevalier would not have refused such a test of implicit obedience to his liege lady: but the days of chivalry are over.”

44 That is undeniable,” said the stranger; 44 but if ascending that bridge can amuse your Ladyship's imagination by recalling such days, it shall be done. I must however confess, though it diminish à little the glory of the enterprize, that having seen even wo-L 5

men and children pass it, in search of birds’ eggs and sea-weeds on the opposite rocks, I have already made trial of my own head, and have passed and repassed it, without any tendency to vertigo.5’

He now lowered the sail, and rowed the boat towards a little creek, where the rocks were barely accessible, while triumph flashed from the bright eyes of Lady Florence, without one apprehension for the life of the person, at whose expense that triumph might be purchased. She thanked him with smiling graciousness. Lady Singleton, equally vexed at Mr. Dexter’s refusal, and the stranger’s prompt compliance with the wishes of Lady Florence, sat in sullen silence ; while Lady Florence ventured to repeat, “ You are too good, Mr. O* Don n el—this is really too flattering. This is indeed Fame paladin, and beats Lord Herbert of Chevbury out. and out.”

Ihe gentiemen could neither express a doubt of the stranger’s safety, since he bad asserted it, nor oppose Lady Florence’s wishes, so directly expressed, they therefore remained silent.

The stranger, requesting Mr. Dexter to hold the rope he had thrown round a rock by way cf anchorage, was already on the edge of the boat, and about to spring upon one of the slippery projections of the rocks, when his arm was suddenly arrested, and a voice murmured in his ear, ft You are going to risk your life, and to be laughed at for Jrour weakness/’ 65Laughed at .fi> lie repeated in a tone of astonishment as he turned round. The only person, near him however was the governess, and surprize for a moment so wholly overcame him, that he remained motionless. The little scene passed unobserved by all, and in the moment of suspended action, a wave, which rolled

silently forward, dashed the boat from its precarious moorings, and threatened imminent danger to the passengers. The ladies screamed ; the boat, thrown among the breakers, was with difficulty prevented from overseting. Mr. Glent-worth and the stranger raised their voices in supplication, that they would not crowd towards the helm. They then recovered the oars, and with some skill, and more presence of mind, rescued the boat from its difficulties, and at the entreaty of Lady Singleton, and her frightened daughters, they rowed into the port of Ballantry.

Lady Florence was mortified that her triumph was incomplete ; Lady Singleton was not displeased to witness the disappointment of her vanity ; and the rest, relieved from the fears -awakened by their recently impending danger, congratulated themselves on their escape and safety.

The carriages were now seen moving

A

along the high road, at the distance of half a mile, and the party ascended from the beach to join them. The stranger remained a little behind to give some orders about his boat to a fisherman on the strand, while the group in advance discussed the necessity of offering an invitation to accompany them to the Giant’s Causeway, and from thence, at Lady Florence’s suggestion, to follow them to Lough Swilly. Lady Singleton thought it their interest to

O	O

attach him to their party, since he was so intelligent a cicerone; Air. Glent-worth asserted that common politeness and gratitude for his attention demanded they should make the offer, even though the talents and manners of the stranger did not render it their interest to do so ; Air. Dexter engaged that he would be happy to accept such an invitation, and cultivate such an acquaintance ; the Colonel thought he certainly appeared a gentleman-like

sort of person ; and Mr. Vandaleur observed that there was, at least, atone of savoir vivre about him, which, if it did not make a gentleman, went very near to do so. Lady Singleton said she would ask him for the Giant’s Causeway; and Lady Florence took upon herself to make the invitation for Lough Swilly: “And he can send orders to his servant, “ said Lady Singleton, “ to follow him with his things.’*

While the party were thus engaged as they ascended the hill, the stranger followed them, and passed the Governess, who loitered indolently along, a few paces behind ; but suddenly turning upon his steps, he joined, and abruptly addressed her.

4£ May 1 beg to know,5* he asked, f< upon what grounds you accused me of weakness a little time back, and for what reason you supposed i should be laughed at ?”

“ You were going to do a foolish

thing, to gratify a foolish person,” she returned with equal abruptness: 44 when people do so, I think they are generally laughed at ; don’t you ?”

44 They at least deserve to be so,” said the stranger, smiling: 44 but I do not allow the act was foolish, though Î cannot answer for the wisdom of the person who commanded it.”

44 For the act, that is according to the value placed or not placed upon the life which would, I am certain, have been lost in its performance,” she replied carelessly.

44 In that point of view then,” said the stranger, 44 the act was perhaps indifferent. Life, however, has not become less valuable for the effort made by your humanity to preserve it.”

She replied negligently “ I thought it a pity that a man should be dashed to pieces for a Lady’s morning amusement, so I interfered ; that was alb”

“ Well, Madam, whatever was the motive of your interference,” he returned, cf 1 am willing to credit, what you seem determined to suppose, that I am indebted to you for the preservation of my life, and this is to acknowledge no trivial debt of obligation.”

“ O you think then I made an extraordinary exertion for you1 No,, 1 acted on the impulse—1 should have done the same for any one.”

This blunt speech, abruptly uttered, made the stranger smile, but it was not the smile of gratified self-love ; and perceiving Mr. Glentworth turning back to meet him, he advanced with alacrity, as if not sorry to break up the irksome conference with his humane but ungracious companion. Mr. Glentworth took his arm, and as they approached the advanced party, he cordially urged his request that the stranger would not deprive them of the pleasure and information afforded by

his society, sooner than his own pursuits positively required. Lady Singleton then offered him a seat in her carriage, and expressed a hope that he would accompany them that night to Port Rush, and proceed with them, • the following morning, to the GianPs Causeway; while Lady Florence, with much grace and courtesy, followed up this invitation bv her own. To the surprize of some, and the disappointment of the rest of the party, the stranger politely but decidedly declined. Good-breeding prevented importunity, and the stranger, having assisted the ladies to their carriages, and , given some directions to the postillions, took his leave, and returned to-Avards the shore.

It is a false maxim in the code of sentiment that, the 44 absent are always in the wrong.”* Absence, on the con-

* 44 L’absent a toujours tort.”

trary, like death, which it represents, absolves the error and cancels the injury, when no toleration is allowed in the actual and present existence of the object. Human infirmity seldom stands the test of elose and perpetual communion, except where passion misleads, or sympathy weakens the judgment.—When placed, therefore, in accidental intimacy with persons, to whom we are at least indifferent, we become disgusted with faults and annoyed by follies, which, when viewed at a distance, and through the medium of memory or imagination, become but sources of ridicule or subjects of pleasantry.

The absence of the stranger, and his polite but firm rejection of further intercourse with his accidental acquaintances, rather raised than lowered him in the general estimation ; but Mr. Glentworth was, at once, his sincerest admirer and warmest eu-

iogistj for the stranger had fascinated him.

“ I have always heard,** he saicf,

54 that an educated and travelled Irishman made the most finished gentleman in the world : unfortunately, however, these advantages are generally purchased at a melancholy price, for, driven by religious and political disqualification to other countries for education and employment, their own remains deprived of' their talents and their services. Whether this Mr. O’Donnel has been a traveller from necessity or

v

inclination, he has certainly derived all the benefit which travelling can bestow, or education lend to native ability: he has more than once accused himself of being an idler: it is melancholy to think

O	*

he may be so from necessity”

44 in my opinion,3* said the Colonel, 44 his manner is a little quizzical, and is much too maniéré for our idea of bon ton : too much of the old school—

handing in and handing out the ladies* like a master of the ceremonies at an assize hall, and all that tiresome gone bye thing.”

“ Precisely, Colonel/’ said Mr. Dexter; “but I-dare say he knew what he was about there-— he, he, he. I think upon the whole there is something equivocal about him, for he certainly had a very shabby jacket on, rather thread-bare, for so fine a gentleman!. Did your Ladyship remark that?” 46 No/’ said Lady Singleton, f4 I never looked at his jacket; but his figure is that of the fighting gladiator in the palace Borghese, which is by much the finest thing in the world/’

44 Critically/’ said Mr. Dexter, 44 which makes one wonder the more he had not a better jacket on.”

44 I should not be surprized,” said Lady Florence, 44 if he was a very vain and cold person : he seems to admire nothing but his great dog ; and his re-

fusing to accompany us was so very ' odd.”

“ I don’t at all doubt that he is an eccentric man,’’ said Mr. Glentworth :

“ the objects of his present pursuit, and the manner in which thev are followed, evihce that : the impression given too bv his air and manner also, is that of a

4/	J

person of a certain high-toned character, little calculated for the rough brakes of every-day life ; and with all his foreign air, he is still very Irish, quick, sensitive, I had almost said irri-tible; and I dare say, with all the pride of all the Milesian oYand Macs in the kingdom into the bargain.”

16 Exactly, Sir,” said Mr. Lexter:

“ he has a sort of a way of reddening up, and of agreeing, only when he likes himself, which, considering the company he had the good fortune to get into, was very impertinent, and at • least impolitic. As to his refusing to join this party, I dare say he thought

it would lead him into an expence h« could not afford —for the poorer the Irish are, the prouder they are.*'

Here the entrance of a late dinner, ’ or rather an early supper, put an end to the conversation ; and the next morn» ing, the travellers, accompanied by such guides as their host recommended, continued their tour to the Giant’s Causeway.

CHAPTER 8

A sudden change in the weather, guides ignorant and officious, and, in a word, the satiety of tastes only to be gratified by the novelty of a pursuit, rendered the Giant’s Causeway an ob-ject of disappointment, rather than of admiration, to its capricious visitants.

The wild grandeur of Pkaskin, the scenery of PorUNoffor^ and the sublimity of Bengore, were lightly passed over, and the inconveniences of bad roads and worse inns were not com-pensated even by the unrivalled phenomena of nature, where she appears most awful and sublime, tc with all her great works about herP

After, therefore, a cursory view of this magnificent Basaltic region, which

*

- . .

*

• *

. - '

1 ■

*

Hector, or something about Venus and Cupid, he could not exactly remember.

The large and commodious house occupied by the Commodore * was the deserted mansion of an absentee, raised on a commanding eminence, which united in its prospect all the most romantic features of the most opposite style of scenery; the sea, lakes, a n d m o u n t a i n s—g 1 e n s, v a 11 i e s, a n d s m i L-ing plantations.

The usual resources which people of the world seek against the intrusion of tedium and sameness hi places of _______ \

* Although the banks of Lough Szeilly (which is an arm of the sea, meeting the river S willy exhibit many dreary tracts of mountain in a state of the rudest nature, }*et some of the low grounds are very rich, and some beautiful scats are to be seen in a high state of cultivation and improvement, dropt, as it were, in the midst of a region savage and wild beyond description.

See Statistical Survey of Donegal;

VOL. I.	M

retirement, were here eagerly pursued and quickly exhausted. Mr. Glent-worth had nothing to read ; Lady Singleton nothing to order ; Mr. Yanda-leur nothing to eat ; the Colonel nothing worth quizzing ; and Lady Florence nothing worth flirting with. Mr. Dexter alone found constant occupation ; played chess with Mr. Glent-worth, backgammon with the Commodore, cards' with the ladies, and shuttlecock with vthe Misses Singleton. Notwithstanding, however, the resources afforded by his talents, each began to think it time to porter leur ennuis ailleurs, in spite of Lady Florence’s entreaties to detain them, when an unexpected order reached the Commodore from the Admiralty to join the fleet off	Two days after the

receipt of the order, he sailed with his little squadron, leaving the delighted and enchanted Lady Florence to settle with the agent for the house, and to re-,

, I

turn to England with Lady Singleton, who had also invited Mr. Vandaleurto be of their travelling party. In something more than three weeks, therefore, from their arrival on the snores of Lough S willy, the tourists recommenced their travels, and at last set out for Bonao’hadee.

o

They had now no longer the accom-

t/	u

modation of the barge: their land journey was not only extended, but lay through a mountainous region, with which'they were best acquainted on the map; but Mr. Dexter having undertaken to conduct them the first stage, with which he said he was perfectly acquainted, having rode there with one of the officers, the party then began their journey under his guidance ; for their drivers were their own servants, and consequently strangers to the roads. The valets and waiting women went the day before in the admiral’s carriage, and were to wait the

arrival of the superior party at the town of *** ; at which, as it was the first town on their route where they could expect any thing like accommodation for so many persons, they had determined to sleep.

The travelling arrangements, however, had undergone some change since they had firstsetout from the Bishop’s. It was now the middle of October ; the weather was severe for the season ; and Lady Florence, obliged to resign her s e a t i n t h e c u r r i c I e, t o o k t h e v a c a n t p 1 a c e in the barouche. Mr. Dexter resigned his to Mr. Glentworth ; and, keeping to the spirit of his original agreement, accepted the command of the curricle, in which he led the van. The Colonel chose a more comfortable situation in Mr. Vandaleur’s travelling-chaise; while the servants were dispatched on the preceding day to make the necessary arrangements for sleeping at the town of ***, the intended ter-

ruination of their first day’s journey. Their road, if road it could be called, on which the wheels of any vehicle had seldom tracked, lay through the wild and mountainous region which skirts the western shores of Lough Swilly. High unbroken mountains, rude and dark heaths,, fractured and disjointed rocks, dismal in hue, and dismantled of herbage, were the prominent features of a route, which presented nothing curious to excite wonder, nothing sublime to awaken admiration. The carriages proceeded slowly and perilously over fearful acclivities, or through more fearful ruts. Scenes of melancholy wildness and desolation succeeded each other ; and though the best road was bad, Mr. Dexter had, in the confidence of ignorance, chosen the worst.

His carriage skimming over a surface which put the more weighty vehicles to a dangerous test, he proceeded with velocity, and, wholly engaged in ma-

naging the safety of his own limbs and life, was careless, or rather unconscious, of the risk encountered by those who were blindly following their ignorant leader.

The cheerless noon of a cloudy day had already elapsed ; the shadows of the overhanging mountains produced a premature evening; and the sea-blasts rushing along the ravines foretold a rising storm ; when the travellers, emerging into a new region, found themselves on the edge of a heath, varied only by a few shattered rocks overgrown with a brown moss, that almost confounded them with the heath in which they were embedded. A new range of mountains, to which a faintly marked road conducted, extended themselves along the now distant horizon.

“ A fine champaign country !” cried Mr. Dexter, standing up, and hallooing through his hands ; then whipping his

horses, with some skill and a good deal of difficulty he continued his route rapidly across the plain, and soon distanced the cavalcade, which had chosen him for their leader.

The champaign country was indeed a flat and tiresome expanse, two or three miles in length ; but it was at the same time a treacherous bos:: its deep pools were concealed by rushes* and its deeper ruts covered by moss, which trembled even to the lightest pressures. The road, artificially constructed, was rudely put together for the mere purpose of drawing turf, and therefore not calculated to sustain a heavier vehicle than those used for that purpose. The gentlemen, who, even in the light travelling chaise, followed Mr. Dex ter, non passibus œquis were at last obliged to alight, and assisted the coachman in dragging the unencumbered vehicle over a fC bad step that is, a spot where the stony

n\r A

foundation of the road, sinking engulfed in the soft bog. had intersected the passage with a deep and almost impassable slough. With much difficulty, and some slight injury to the springs -their purpose was effected; when, resuming their seats, and casting many anxious glances after their leader, they proceeded toward the mountains, in the true egoism of their cast ; wholly bent on self-preservation, to the exclusion of every' thought for those who followed.

Meantime, with more difficulty and more danger, the heavier carriage endeavoured to keep pace with those

which had nreceded it. The horses,

& *

laboring through the swampy soil, w ere frequently unable toget on, though the postillion, on loot, drew forward the leaders. In spite of every care, on their arrival at the “ bad step/' which the light chaise had so difficultly passed, the leaders sunk shoulder deep

in the bog, and in the effort which they made to extricate themselves, with a furious plunge drew forward the carriage^ and unfortunately overturned it. Luckily, upon the first alarm, Mr. Glentworth and the ladies had alighted ;

. and, notwithstanding the increasing darkness, the sharpness of the sea-blast, and the heavy drops of rain which fell at intervals, the ladies persisted in walking on, until the carriage should have passed the perilous swamp, and have regained the comparative safety of the mountain road. Mr. Glentworth, therefore, and his fair charge, proceeded at a rapid pace till they reached the extreme verge of the bog. Here three cross-roads presented themselves to their choice ; but to whatever point they turned their eyes, neither curricle nor chaise could be perceived. The good sense of Mr. Glentworth could only afford a general idea of the route which they should pursue. He knew

it must be to the south-east; but as they could not proceed without running the risk of missing their carriage, which, from the increasing darkness, was not yet in sight, he placed the ladies under a cleft in the rocks, to shelter them from the rising storm; and impatient at the protracted delay, he was about to return to expedite the carriage, when one of the postillions arrived with the intelligence, that in raising the coach, the springs had given way, and that it was impossible to go forward without more assistance.

The vexations of life are not always to be estimated by their dignity ; and there is, perhaps, no annoyance mbre perplexing than the cross accidents of a journey, sharpened by the accumulated evils arising out of time, place, season, and weather. In a wild and unknown region, on the eve of a dark and stormy night, without any appearance of human habitation or relief.

Mr. Glentworth found himself surrounded by five helpless and complaining women, unable alike to go forward' or to return, and without even a spot v . to shelter them from the inclemency of the night. Lady Singleton, instead of soothing, added to his vexation,, by laying their misfortunes to his account.

“ If, Mr. Glentworth,” she cried in a tone of peevish impatience, ‘i you would have suffered the postillions to drive on fast, and keep up with the curricle, as / ordered them, and as I knew was right, this would not have happened.”

“ Even so/’ said Mr. Glentworth,

“ we should but have anticipated our misfortune, and we should now be in - the middle of that horrible morass, instead of enjoying the comparative protection of these mountains; for, slowly and quietly as we drove, you see the ( carriage was not proof against the treachery of these swampy roads-/1

v

There being no person present to admire her fortitude, or observe her equanimity, Lady Florence gave way to the natural feebleness of a character to which vanity alone lent an affected firmness. Her vague and tiresome complaints, her asserted causes of danger and fear, afforded sanction to the tears . which flowed from the excessive timidity of the Miss Singletons, who saw nothing but wolves and banditti, and all the horrors conjured up by her nervous imagination. In the meantime, Miss O’Halloran, laying aside her usual indolence and heaviness, climbed from rock to rock, with something of the fearless agility of the mountain-goat, and soon returned with intelligence that the road towards the left led to the shores of Lough Swilly, though at some distance ; and that the grey smoke of a cabin chimney was visible among the rocks in that direction, Mr. Glent-worth, who had been turning all pos.-

• sib'le resources and plans of action in his mind, received this information with great pleasure, and applauded Miss O’Halloran’s acuteness and presence of mind, who, after all, had taken the best, though not the most ordinary way, of relieving them from their difficulties. He now, therefore, dispatched the postillion to fetch back one of the horses, and to bring him a brace of loaded pistols, leaving the rest of their travelling arms with the coachman, and the other postillion, to watch the carriage luggage ; and Mr. Glentworth’s plan was now to make for the habitation discovered, or supposed, by Miss O’Halloran ; and by the direction of its inhabitants, to send bis postillion forward to the nearest town, from whence proper assistance could be procured : the chance of overtaking the other carriages that night he gave up as hopeless : when, therefore, the postillion returned with a brace of pistols,

and one of the horses, which he led, the party proceeded with timid and cautious steps through the narrow defiles of the mountains, towards the point from whence Miss OTIalloran had perceived the smoke ascending. The rocky shelvings of the mountains, as they advanced, almost met above their heads ; sometimes abruptly receding, they admitted the storm in all its force; and again closing with a cavernous effect, they threw the uncertainty of profound darkness over the steps of the dispirited wanderers. No grey smoke was now visible : no ray of twinkling light streamed from 44 the loop-hole window of clay-built habitation all was darkness and doubt ; or fancied, or real danger. Lady Singleton’s fertility of resource now wholly failed her : her subdued spirit, unable to dictate, found vent in complaint and reproach, which flowed alternately against Mr. Dexter, Mr. Glentworth,

the coachman. Miss O’Halloran, and, above all, the country itself—the savage, wild, neglected, barbarous, inhospitable country. Mr. G lent worth, less to refute the invectives of Lady Singleton, than to engage the attention •of his timid party from their fears, answered her with great pleasantry, defending in turn all the parties accused ; and asserting that their adventure was, in the true spirit of romance, as inevitably incidental to their situation as ramblers ; and for the savage wildness of the country, he observed, that he could point out scenes as wild in their native Derbyshire. While he spoke, the postillion, a stout lad, endowed with an increase of spirit by the possession of his pistols, stopped his horse, and after a moment’s pause, cried aloud, tc Who goes there?"—At this sudden interrogatory, the affrighted women

O	%/	1	O

clung round Mr. Glentworth with stifled emotion, who asked of the pos-

tillion in an angry voice: “ What do you mean, John, by that question— who are you speaking to

“ Look, Sir,5’ rephed John, “ on the top of that rock to the left : do you see nothing like a ghost, or highwayman, clinging, as it were, to the branch of a treeV’

“Nothing, John,’' replied Mr. Glent-worth, coolly, “ that in the least resembles either;” but as he spoke, he drew forth his pistol, for he did perceive a large figure stealing down the frightful acclivities of the mountains, and which, hid for a moment among the underwood, again emerged more distinct and obvious to the view.

Mr. G lent worth silently put the women behind him, under the shelter of a rock, watching the motionsof the figure; . while John, impatient, either from fear or courage, cried out again : “ I say ; who goes there ?”

O

“ "Tis me, dear,0 answered a voice

from above ; and the figure of the speaker, more distinctly seen thanithad yet been, gradually descended the perilous heights, canying down with every hazardous step masses of rock, of herbage, and of earth.

Meantime Mr. Glentworth awaited the result of this descent with all possible coolness, and, as the person ap-

9

peared alone, without any apprehension, while John again repeated:	Who

goes there ? Speak ! who are you ? or HI blow your brains out.**

45	Devil a foolisher thing than ever you did,” replied the voice, u in the way of getting information and while the speaker continued to descend, he added : 44 Who is it I am, you want to

know ? vvhv then, bad luck to the bit

%/ *

of myself knows who I am, nor where I am ; for sure Fve lost myself intirely among these thieving mountains, and my curse on them ; they're the devils ! God pardon me for saying so, in regard

of putting one astray on a dark night.” “Me. Rory!” cried Mr. Glentworth, by decrees recognizing the curious ac-

O	O	O

cent and idiom of their quondam acquaintance at Glen arm.

“ Who calls }'3 cried Me. Rory, springing from a rock at a fearful height., arid coming down upon his feet, with a weight sufficient to have dislocated every joint in a less powerful frame : a quantity of loose earth, and disjointed rock, fell with him.

“ Then 1 am right,” said Mr. Glenl-worth. “ Me. Rory, do you not remember the travellers you met at Glen-arm ?”

The ladies now rushing eagerly from their hiding-place, ' approached the astonished and bewildered Irishman ; all addressing him at once, without leaving Mr. Glentworth an opportunity of asking a single question ; while Me. Rory stood motionless in the middle of a circle, which seemed conjured round

him by enchantment, and on which a rising moon now.threw from the scattered clouds a feeble light.

“The Lord Jasus be good to me, now, and evermore, amen i’’ cried Me. Rory, crossing himself; “ for surely this bales .the world, fairly ; so it does, to see the English quality that I left safe and snug in their coaches, as good as a month go, upon the S/iaaghraumI may say, this blessed night, among the mountains of KËlmecrennan, the leeches, and thefamales and all; sure I took ye’z for the good peoplef at first, so I did,** then rubbing his knee, he added:

“ Oh! Jas us, but 1 got a cruel ing off that thief of a rock, so 1 did ; but any way, ye’z are all heartily wel-

* Skaughran, a very expressive Irish word in frequent use, meaning unprovided for, or oh the look out.

+ Good people, the fairies, great frequenters of mountains.

come to County Donegal. So ve’z are,” and he made a low bow to the whole party.

Mr. G lent worth then informed him of their misadventure, in a few words, and begged his assistance, observing that they would deem themselves very fortunate if they could obtain shelter for that night, even in a cabin, if no better asylum could be procured.

Ci A cabin !” repeated Me. Rory: “ troth, and Fd be heartily sorry to put the likes of ye z in a cabin, any way, while the fine ancient ould Abbs has a house over his head ; which he has’nt, in regard of his being dead and buried these two months—pace be with him ! but you and your’s, your Honor, shall be remarkable welcome to the best the place affords, and a snug little place it is, not a stone’s throw off, nei. ther, as 1 may say/’

Although this speech of Me. Rory’s was rather unintellibie, yet, as it evi-

dently included an invitation for the night to some house in the neighbourhood, superior to a cabin, and as they had no alternative, he resolved to accept the offer, and desired Me. Rory to lead on.. Lady Singleton, who had now sufficiently recovered her spirits to be able to dictate, drew Mr. Glentworth a little aside, and accused him of imprudence in thus throwing them into the power of a person of whom they knew nothing, and whose appearance in such a place, at such an hour, was at least suspicious. Mr. Glentworth argued, from the honest countenance of Me. Rory, his frank and simple manners, and the dilemma to which they were reduced, calling upon her to propose some better plan than that which he had adopted.

64 I will, at least, sift him well,” said Lady Singleton, 44 before I put myself in his pdwer;” and turning to Me. Rory, she said :—

“ Mr. Mc. Ror}r, I must observe to you that I think it, rather extraordinary we should find you in such a place as this at such an hour, and I must insist on knowing whal brought von here, for

O	O	kJ	*

it is a suspicious circumstance/*

“ Why then it is remarkable cxlror-nary. Madam, sure enough ; and it’s little I thought of meeting the likes of you here bove all places in the world; troth, and 1 thought it looked mighty ugly at first when I saw ve’z all below me, for 1 was crassing the mountain, after going as far as Kilmacrcnnan church, * with a decent young man, a friend of mine, who went to be buried this morning, and when the dark came

* Kilmacrcnnan, n poor depopulated town. Part of the friary founded here by the C’Don-nels still remains. Near to this town is a rock, on which the O’Donnds, Princes of Tirconncl, were always inaugurated.

War Annal.

on I lost my way fairly, so I did, among these devils of mountains.”

ct So, you were returning from a funeral : but before I proceed any further, I must know exactly where abouts ice are, Mr. Mc. Rory.5’

“■ Why, Madam, you are at this blessed moment, above all the days in the year, in the Prowince of Ulster, County Donegal, Barony of Kihna-crennan, district of Clonaghneally, and the Parish of Bailemagrabflarla&hP 4

O	o

“ Well then, lead on, Mr. Me. Rory,” cried Lady Singleton, in a tone of command ; and the party proceeded down a gfloomv ravine in the mountain.

O	%i

“ But,” continued Lady Singleton, *

* The Abbey of this name, in the Dioccss of Raphoe, was founded by St. Colomb-kill, St. Coiumb’s celebrated relic (now in the O5 Don’.el family), called the Cathach, was said to have been preserved there.—See note end of the second volume.

“ if vve are really in a parish, I must beg you will take us to the Rector’s or the Curate’s, or whoever the resident clergyman is.”

“ O ! not a residenter, in the way of a minister, there is, Madam, in the whole parish, nor protestant neither, though it is a mighty fine parish and great tithes ; * but sure, if the great Bishop of Derry was hard bye, conva-nient, you should put this night over ye’z at the master's any way, which is just at the end of the turn to the lift among the rocks towards the Lough, down forenent there/*

46	You are conducting us then to your master’s house,” said Lady Single-ton.

No, Madam, I am not; but to the fine ancient ould Abbe’s—God rest

* ee I have found parishes in my Dioccss that never have seen a Protestant minister.”—Bishop of Limerick's pastoral letter.

him—'thf Abbé C'Donnel—Father Ma-Jachy O'Donnell’

41 O’DonnelF* repeated Mr, Glent-worth.

44 Good heavens!” exclaimed Lady Florence ; 44 how odd ! is the Abbé a tali distinguished looking person, rather handsome?”

44 He is, my Lady—that is he is mat, in respect of being dead and buried ; but he was as pretty and as fine a looking old gentleman as you'd wish to look on, and mighty like the master-only not so young in regard of his be« ing his grand-uncle. He had a mighjjj elegant herring,# and was laid in the very Abbey-grounds his own am oestors founded before the flood : for we carried him all the way to the Ab* bey of Donegal + by his own particular

* Herring, funeral—from burial,

•h The Abbey of Donegal is romantically situated on the bay of that name. A monastery vnr. t.

desire ; the master attended the corps., and there was'nt a dry eye in the place.3*

“ What is your master’s name ?’3 -asked Mr. Glentvvorth, impatiently, in the hope of obtaining a direct answer by a direct question.

“ What’s my master’s name, your Honor? Why, Roderick—Roderick is his Christian name, I ought to know that well, any way, being christened at the self-same time with him myself, for sure we are fosterers; Roderick O'Donnel is his name; Colonel Roderick O’Donnel, and a real undoubted Prince if he had his due.*3

for Franciscan Friars was founded here in the year 1474, by O’Do Roe O’Donnel, Princo of Tirconnel, and by his wife Fionguala, daughter of O’Brien, Prince of Thomond.—O’Do died 1505. Roderic O’Donnel, Bishop of Derry, who died 1550, was interred here. There was in this house a well-chosen library.

Waul—Monasticon.

W	^	i-j	tw	9

<c And where ia Colonel 0' Donnel ?'* demanded Mr. Glentworth, eagerly.

“ Why then, troth, your Honor, I could’nt tell you that, barring Vd tell

%j	7	C?

you a lie, for I parted with him at New Town Glens when Î went to keep my station, and i never set eyes on him since only by letter9 for since his uncle died he never cares to keep at home, but he’s wandering about with a bit of a boat he has; and not at all hearty, but quite the contrary, and if he was in it% its himself would give you the cead-mille-faltha®, so he would, but yez are welcome any how, and the best that the place affords is at your service/’

îC Then you are taking us to vour master’s house in his absence ?” asked Mr. Glentworth ; while the rest of the party agreed, in a low voice, that this

* Ten thousand welcoraejJ

Colonel O’Donnel could be no other than the Cicerone of the shores of Ben-more.

“ I am taking ye’z to the ancient ould Abbe’s house, which is the master’s now by will, and it’s little enough for a man who owns the countv round from Derry agates to the Bridge of Bran-dorush; that is, his people did in the ould times, the Prince’s of Tirconnel, though devil a prouder Prince among them all nor himself ; and well he may, long life to him.”

66 This is quite an unexpected adventure,” said Lady Singleton, “ and almost worth the purchase of our fatigue.—I expect a great deal from it.” “ It is unfortunate, however,'’ added Lady Florence, “ Colonel O’Donnel should not be at home to receive us.5’ Mr. Glentworth now obtained the best information he could from Me. Rory, relative to the nearest town from whence they could get assistance for

the carriage,, and Me. Rory promised to find a messenger immediately to dispatch for that purpose; adding, that he would see the safvants and the cattle taken care of that night before he slept; and that Larry Me. Quire, the smith, would mend up the coach in no time, once he set about it, for he is a fine mechanic, your Honor, and would earn as good bread as any man in the barony, only for the whiskey.

The wanderers now issued from the gloom of the mountain ravine into n glen formed in the midst of an amphitheatre of rocks, which, by an abrupt opening, admitted a full view of the noble estuary of Lough Swilly. * The drifting winds, which swept over the waters, had scattered away every vapour from before the face of the heavens ; and the moon, broad and re-

* There arc many romantic little glens among the wildest of the Donegal mountains.

splendent, threw a flood of silver light upon a scene indescribably wild and romantic. On the summit of one of the shelving rocks, a ruin of some extent was visible,, and underneath its shadows, and almost of one substance with the cliff of which it seemed a part, a small house or cottage was rendered most distinguishable by the smoke of its chimney. It was a formless but picturesque structure, evidently created out of the materials of the ruins which mouldered above it, and within view of a steep torrent, which descending from the mountains, dashed from point to point of the rocks over which it flowed, and formed a small but noisy stream, on its passage through the glen to Lough Swilly.

All about the house was dark and silent, and Me. Rory endeavoured to obtain admittance by a door, which lie called the little back door, in the front of the house ; but it resisted his efforts.

“	lie	said,	turning	round,

“ the devil is'nt able for this door when it takes the staggers*, as often it does/’ He then advanced to the hail door, and gave so gentle a rap, that Mr. Glentvyorth observed, it was impossible any one within could hear.

“ Why, your Honor, there is nobody at home, only oil Id Mary, and i would’nt wish to disturb the cratur but as little as possible, for Pil engage she has tould her padreens f and gone to rooste long since,”

He then knocked a little louder, and in a few minutes a person appeared at a window, and spoke to him in Irish : he replied to her at some length in the same language, pointing to the party, who accompanied him, and in a few minutes the door was opened, and an old woman appeared with a light in her

* Literally copied, + Padreens—~bead?,

a.

hand. She courtesied low, and addressed the party in Irish, while Me. Kory apologized for her by saying,

“ The cratur has no English, * being an on Id Irish servi lor; but she welcomes ye’z all heartily.’’

The party now followed Me. Rory and the old woman into a sort of room on the ground-floor, which resembled the idea generally formed of a Spanish inn ; the earthen floor was neither very clean nor very level ; the raflers of the ceiling, through which the thatch was visible, were black with smoak, A large cavity under the chimney, laced with two posts supporting a third, laid horizontally along them, formed the. lire-place; and a quantity of turf, heaped on the extensive hearth, was blown

The remains of the old ïritli clans arc to bû found in the mountain regions of Donegal, and there English is very little known.

Statistical Survey of Donegal.—Page 101.

into a flame by the old woman, who had squatted herself before it, and was blowing it with her petticoat. A few wooden shelves, on which some culinary articles were arranged, occupied one side of the walls ; and on the other stood a large old cumbrous settle, .Notwithstanding the fatigue and disappointment which the travellers had undergone, surprize and curiosity now mastered every other feeling. In Mr* Glentworth alone a sentiment more profound prevailed ; compassion for a man, who, with talents so distinguished, and a character so interesting, was destined perhaps to wear away the vigour of his life in a solitude so remote and dreary, in a dwelling so comfort-

%/ J	O

less and lowly; for whatever might be the story of this singular and accomplished gentleman, Mr. Glentworth could not discard the suspicion which, had forcibly obtruded itself on his

N O

mind, that his fortunes were at variance with the loftiness of his spirit, and the refinement and elevation of his character: he rejoiced, therefore, that the stranger was abroad, and not in the way of having his feelings and his pride put to the blush by the unavoidable exposure of his circumstances, which, on the first appearance of things, seem* gd to be so much below mediocrity.

While the iadies were crowding round the fire, and casting their eyes in every direction^ Me. Rory, who had for a moment left the room, returned with a bottle and glass in his hands, saying :

I humbly ax your pardon for shewing yeV into the kitchin, but Mary will take in a grid le full of kindling to the master’s room in no time, and I advise yeV all to try the least taste in life of this—devil a harm it will do ye Vi—no, but ail the good in

your hearts better nor all the fires that ever were lit on a St. John’s Eve.55.

“ Why, this is whiskey, Mr. Rory,*’ said Mr.Glentworth, tasting it; “smoked whiskey.3 *

“ It is, Sir, surely; the real Inisoicén, the best Potteen * that ever was brewed.”

The ladi es, however, declining t,o taste the Inisowen, jt Me. Rory put it aside, and went to assist Mary in making a fire in his master’s room ; in a few minutes he returned, and conducted them into the little parlor, which he had vainly attempted to enter by the door which had taken the staggers* A turf fire already blazed, and Me. Rory lighted a little lamp which hung from above the chimney-piece.

“ And now,” he said., “ before I look

* Whiskey made illegally in a small pot,

+ Inisowen is famous for this liquor,

to getting a toothful for your Honor and the ladies, I’ll just step and send your servant boy back with a drop of com-

i

fort to the craturs in the bosr that arc watching the coach* and if your Honor will be phased to consint to it, we’ll bring the cattle here, for there is room plenty in th’ould cow-stall, and a lock of hay to boot, for the craturs; for if they were left all night in the bog, your Honor, they’d be after getting the cruppan in respect of eating the keeb-duh, % and when the tide is out, your Honor, which it will be before eight o’clock., plase God, we can send the boy and the baste across the strand to the town for Larry Me. Quire and his tools/'

As nothing better than his plan could be suggested, Mr. Glentworth expressed his approbation and thanks

* Cruppan, a disease contracted from eating the black bog rush; Kceb*iluh, a black rush.

to :uc. nory tor proposing 11, who went immediately to put it into execution, crying:

“ O ! you’re no ways obliged to me, at all, your Honor; troth, I wish 1 could do any thing to sarve you or ybur’s, and I’d do it with all the veins.”*

When Mo. Rory had withdrawn, the attention of the party was attracted to the style and furniture of the little room which they now occupied, and which excited, while it amused, their idle curiosity. The floor, only better than that of the kitchen by being cleaner, was uncarpeted ; the windows, though screened by shutters, were uncurtained ; the hearth was ungrated, and the walls were simply white-washed. A 1 a rge o 1 d - fas h i o n e d s o fa, a fe vv d e a 1 c h a i rs, two oak tables, a reading-desk, and some hanging shelves, comprised the whole furniture: but the shelves were laden '

# With all the veins in iny heart.

with books in almost every language. The larger table was covered with the results of scientific research, mingled with papers, manuscripts, and some mathematical instruments. A large book lay open on the reading-desk ; the character was beautiful, and the vellum pages illuminated. An antique sword, of most curious workmanship, was suspended over the chimney-piece; and the Pedigree of the O'Donnel family, beginning with Niall, of the nine hostages, hung beneath it. But the 4

O J	O

object which most attracted, and longest fixed their attention, was the picture of a man in a religious habit. Between this picture and the stranger, they observed a striking resemblance. Time, however, and deep thought, seemed to have given lines to the countenance of the picture, which could not be traced in the stranger. Imagination would have placed such a head on the shoulders of Cardinal Wolsey, in his

disgrace. The expression was, grief and disappointment, preying on the energies of genius and ambition. The picture appeared to be impannelled in a door*

64 This must be the Abbé Me. Rory spoke of,” said Lady Singleton, 44 by the petit collet, I dare say he was a pretty dangerous sort of person. All Abbes that I have ever known were Fracassien ; and that must have been a Jesuit by his countenance/’

44 He was much too handsome for an Abbé/’said Lady Florence : 44 quite as handsome as his nephew, only not so young/’

44 It is, indeed, a most acute counter nance/* said Mr. Gientworth.

Here Me. Rory entered, and having informed Mr. Gientworth that he had dispatched provisions to the craturs in the bog, he begged to know what the ladies would plase to have»

44 There is as nice a bit a bacon to

the fore,” he said, “ as ever hung in a chimney corner; and in regard of a fresh egg, Pll pit the bradât hen against the world ; and troth, if she never laid an egg, the cratur, we would keep her for liwk sake:* and sure, if the master was in zV, it is’nt with a rasher and egg Pd be putting off the likes of you ; but the best of tay and coffee for the lee-dies Pd have.”

Mr. Gientworth entreated Me. Rory not to make himself uneasy; said his bill of fare was very good,, and that they were all in a state of appetite which did not render them particularly nice.

When Me. Rory retired, Lady Single-ton, who had been tossing over the papers, and prying into every thing, observed, that she began to have suspicions about the stranger, not much to

* Bracket, speckled.—All speckled animals are esteemed lucky. There are many stories current of the magical powers of trout,

his advantage; and quoted several observations of Mr. Dexter s, which Mr. • filent worth endeavored to refute.

Lady Florence said, that it was at least a singular thing for a man of hi? appearance to live in such a solitary and savage place; and that his evident wish to escape them did not argue much in his favor.

“ As to his being a Colonel, as’ Me. Rory called him/’ said Lady Singleton, “ that is merely, as it strikes me, a nom de guerre; however, I shall find out from Me. Rory the history of that before we go.”

Miss Singleton said she thought he looked very like a Captain of Banditti she once drew standing under a rock ; to which her sister implicitly agreed.

M iss O’Halloran, for the first time breaking silence, coolly observed that the picture of the Abbe was in motion.

\

She had scarcely announced the extraordinary fact, to the consternation of the whole party, when the picture was pushed forward, and the stranger himself appeared occupying its place, wrapped in a long dark cloak, which added to the natural neighth of his stature. The effect produced was no less striking than the event was unexpected. The stranger, for a moment, stood motionless at the threshold of the door ; the dark rocks without forming a strong relief to his figure, on which the light of the lamp flashed brightly. Surprize and confusion characterized the group within. The stranger at last advanced, closed the pictured door, and bowed to all with an air of courteous recognition ; but his courtesy could not disguise the profound mortification and amazement which were visible in his countenance.

“ I am afraid, Sir,” said Mr. Glent-

worth, “ that this is as unseasonable as it is an unexpected event: but we are still destined to be your debtors, and that without even the interference

of your volition, or our own.” .He

«/ '

then briefly related the circumstances of their accident—their meeting with Me. Rory in the mountains; his promise of shelter for that night; and their discovery of the name of the person under whose roof they were to find an asylum.

The necessity of the case must plead for our intrusion,” he added; “ and your advice, perhaps, may assist us to shorten its duration.”

The stranger's answer included all that politeness, and even kindness, could dictate on the occasion. lie took upon himself to make all necessary arrangements for refitting the carriage; urged the necessity of their remaining where they were for that night*; and repeatedly expressed his regret,

that the hut, of which he was but recently the master, and from which he had been for some weeks absent, ' could so ill, in any way, accommodate them. “ However,” he added, “ it would at least afford shelter from the inclemency of a night which was every moment becoming more wild and dreary.” Still, however, though all this was said with an apparently cordial sincerity, it was evident that feelings of pride and hospitality, of politeness and annoyance, were strongly at variance; and that though he wished to have been of use to his guests, he would have preferred being so by any other mode than that he was obliged of necessity to adopt.

“ Well,” said Lady Singleton, “here we are, however, hongre, malgré, and a most dreary adventure we have had of it, Mr. O'Donnel; or, I beg your pardon, Colonel O’Donnel; for we have learnt your military rank fronv

vour servant: but I cannot imagine what you can have been about, wan-dering in such a night as this among these horrible mountains.”

“ I was endeavoring, Madam/’ he replied, smiling, to get home as fast as I could, after a ramble of more than six weeks duration on foot.”

While bespoke, the door was opened by Me. Rory, who entered, laden with things to lay the table for dinner; when catching a look of his master, he exclaimed :

“ Why, then, blessed Virgin !” is it the maister I see there, opposite forp» nent me ?—Ah! Sir, dear, how did you get in? Sure it must be by the little back door in the front of the house,—« Och ! Bran, my basle> are you come back to me, agrah! — Well, what luck I have, and the quality here and all !-*» and soon as I lay the table I’ll attind your Honor, and get you a change > Sir ;

for ru ingage you are well wet with the rain, Colonel.”

During this address, Me. Rory was laying a clean but coarse cloth, with every thing else of suitable plainness; and his master, with an air of great discomfort, was looking silently on, while Mr. Glentworth begged he would stand on no ceremony, but retire and change his dress, which the rain had penetrated in spite of his watch-cloak ~ 6< For you ought to remember,” he said, smiling, f<r that we are less guests than intruders.”

This speech awakened 0'Donn.el from his silent reverie: and suddenly recalled to himself, he hastily replied : <c I only lament I cannot do the honors of a host by such guests as they ought to be done : but 1 have been an absentee from this little retreat almost from the moment I becarfte its' master.”

“ Me. Rory, followed by the old woman, now entered with the dinner, which exceeded the letter of his bill of fare; for in addition to the rashers and eggs, appeared some excellent dried salmon, and some potatoes and butter, which Mr. Glentworth assured Me, Rorv were a feast in themselves.

Cf O! it’s true for your Honor; they

are, surely,” returned Me. Rory :

tc they’re the real Blacks.”

■/

Me. Rory then placed chairs round the table, invited the company to be seated, and appeared much delighted, when he saw with what goodwill they partook of the simple fare he had prepared for them; while his master, who refused to join his guest, on the plea of having dined, stood silently leaning against the chimney-piece; the color varying in his face whenever Me. Rory opened his lips; and the confusion of mortified pride encreasing on his coun-

fcenance with every trivial incident that tended to wound it. — But when Me. Rory, after waiting in a formal attitude for a few seconds behind Mr. Glent-worth’s chair, stepped forward, and said in a loud whisper, Does your Honor know what’s gone with the bottle of wine, was left out after the wake?*' be suddenly left the room, followed by Me. Rory, who continued to repeat: cc Ï disremember me inti rely about the bottle of wine, so I do; which is remarkable.**

a So,*’ said Ladv Singleton, u it is pretty evident that this man is bored to death by finding us here; and it does not took well to see him so gene by our presence.’*

“ It at least looks natural,” said Mr. Glentvvorth. ct His manner arises out of his feelings, which are those of a proud, and I fear a poor man.55

u Of a very vain man, I believe,M

said Lady Florence. “Upon the whole, he gives me the impression of being an amazing coxcomb.”

The entrance of Me. Rory put a stop to the conversation. He came forward with a countenance dilated with pleasure; and laying two bottles of wine on the table, he said:

“ There is a bottle of Madeira for your Honor, and some Pore for the ieedies,—And ve’z shall have as beauti» ful a cup of tay as ever was made ; and Mary has the cake cn the gridle; and the maister desires respects, and he’ll wait on ye’z as soon as he is dressed : and troth, and he’s heartily sorry he lias nothing better to offer ye'z; but sure if it was gold ye’z should have it just the same—and long life to him, for his like is’nt this night on the floor of God’s creation, though he's rather crass to myself to-night, any how; and devil a know I know for why, if it is not for vol. ï»	a

making so free with your Honor: for, as I tould him, if I would’nt make free with the likes of you, who is it Td make free with?*—Sure it’s the real quality takes less on them always.”

NOTES.

Lough-Dergk, page 103.— This famous Pilgrimage is in the parish of Templecarn, and ba* rony of Tyrhugh. On this lake there are several elands ; the largest is called the island of St* Dabeoc ; some call it St. Fintan’s island, and others the island of Saints.—Richardson’s Folly of Pilgrimages,

In this island was a priory of Canons Regular, following the rule of St. Augustine, which was dedicated to the Saints Peter and Paul, founded, as some say, by the great Apostle of Ireland ; but others give the foundation of it to St. Dabeoc. {Annal. Munst.) 'This saint was also called Mobeoc and Beonan : he was brother to St. Canoe, who flourished about the year 492, St. Dabeoc is patron of this church, where three festivals are held to his honor yearly. It had a fine chapel, with convenient houses for the monks, the remains of which are yet to be

o 2

fc/ ^	AIWA JU •

aeon. One of the St. Patricks was prior îler« about the year 850. (War. Mon.)

Notwithstanding the reputed holiness of this Celebrated monastery, it was plundered and reduced to ashes by Bratachas O’Boyle and Me. Mahon, A. D. 1207. (Annal. Manst.) John was prior in 1353. (Ogygia.)

St. Patrick’s Purgatory, as it is called, was f/rst fixed in this island ; but it being near to the shore, and a bridge from the main-land giving the people a free and easy access to it, the cave Was closed up, and another was opened in a lesser island, abôut half a mile from the shore.

Some people have given the invention of thij Purgatory to the great St. Patrick ; but others^ with more probability, ascribe it to Patrick, who was prior here about the year 850.	(War.

Mon.)

This Purgatory continued a long time in re» pute, both at home and abroad. We find in our records several safe conducts granted by the kings of England to foreigners desirous to visit it, and particularly in the year 1350, to Male-testa Ungarus, knight; another, bearing thef *ame date, to Nicholas dc Bncaria, a nobleman of Ferrara; {liymer's Foedera, T. 4. p. 1C7) andin 1397, one to Raymond Viscount do Pu. rillcnx and Knight of Rhodes ; with a train of

twenty men and thirty horses. (Ib. T. 8, p. 14) But this Purgat ory must have fallen afterwards into disrepute ; for we find, that by the authority of the Pope Alexander VI. (he having considered the same in the light of imposition), it was demolished on St. Patrick’s day, A. D. 1497, by the father guardian of the Franciscans of Donegal, and some other persons of the Deanery of Lough Erne, who were deputed for this purpose by the bishop. A canon of the priory of St. Dabeoc usually resided on the island, for the service of the church and pilgrims. {Mon. Ib. p. 103.)

The extent of this island is scarcely three quarters of an Irish acre. The cave of the Purgatory is built of freestone, and covered with broad flags, and green turf laid over them. In length, within the wadis, it measures sixteen feet and a half, and in b4adth about two feet and one inch :	when	thb\Aoor is shut, no light

can be discovered, save what enters at a small window in a corner, (War. Mon.) and here the males and females do penance together. It was here that Carolan, the famous Irish bard and musician, recollected the touch of a lady’s hand he had been in love with twenty years before. In 1630, the government of Ireland thought fit to have it finally suppressed, and it

accordingly was dug tip, to the no small distress and Joss of the R. C. Clergy. {War. Annal.) But in the memory of the oldest persons lever heard speak of it, the resort of pilgrims from all parts of Ireland has always been immense: the Purgatory, if ever dug up, is now rebuilt, and in the middle of the summer as devotedly and numerously frequented as ever.

Statistical Survey of Donegal, by J. Ml Varlin, If. D.

Did homage to Ring James I. page 183.— When Hugh O’Donnel, Chief of Tirconnel, Hcd to Spain, and his brother Roderick possessed himself of his territories, the cousin and dear friend of the exiled chief, Ni all O'Donnel, a man of great prowes^and military reputation, was summoned to Diwim to appear before th$ Lord Deputy and Council to receive a patent upon part of the chieftaincy of Tirconncl, u in the hope (says the Chronicle of the Four Masters), to win him over to the English side; but little tempted by an English Earldom, which was offered him, instead of attending this summons, he fled to Kilmacrennan, where the Rode of Inauguration stood} and sent for O’Firgil, the

successor of Columb-kill,*' by whom he was made the O'Donnel.”

Translation of the Irish Chronicle called the Annals of the Four Masters,

* O'Firgil was a sort of bardic priest, and hereditary chief-maker' of Tirconnel. The order, descended from the Druidical institutions, differed only by being Christian priests. It is a singular proof of the love of the Irish for the ancient customs of their country, that such a charac« ter and profession existed as late as the days of James I. and the preference of Niall O'Donnel for his Irish ianistry, (though but a sound), and his rejection of an English Earldom, with a portion of land attached to it, h equally singular. The history of this independent chief is thus sadly concluded in the Chronicle,

** On Niall’s refusal, the King's Lord Lieutenant and Council were highly displeased, and Niall O’Donnei, his brother, and son, were taken up shortly after on suspicion of abetting a rebel chief, O’Dogherty :	he	came	off

with his life according to lave, but with his son was com dgmned to perpetual imprisonment.”

Annals of the Four Masters, END OF VOL. I.

O’DOMNEL.

CHAPTER 9

When the cloth was removed, and Me. Rory had placed the table near the fire, and the chairs round it, he still seemed to linger with an obvious anxiety in the room : it was evident, by his efforts, that he was solicitous to excuse his master’s absence, and apparent neglect of those hospitable rites, which, in the estimation of this ge» nuine Irishman, were the first of virtues.

Lady Singleton, who always suspected something, even where there VOL. II.	B

was least grounds tor suspicion, merely to shew her superior acuteness and penetration, now observed in French, to her party, that the sudden retreat of the master, and the lin^erinu* of the

O

servant, were odd circumstances, that the whole had une mauvaise mine, and that she wished they were safe out of the horrible mountains, where none but a man of desperate fortunes would reside.—“ She did not like,” she added, the air of the place altogether/’ and observed, that the immense sword or sabre over the chimney-piece was a singular piece of furniture in any place but the retreat of a captain of a band of Cf White Boys,3' or some such outlawed desperado. As she spoke, she directed her eyes to the sword ; and Mr. Glent-worth, laughing at the folly of her suspicion, said aloud, that he supposed the sword was some family relic.** cc Is it the sword, your Honor ?” said Me. Rory, whose eyes were fixed

on the stranger’s, though he was affecting, in his own words, 44 just to ready up the place/’

44 Yes,” said Mr. Glentworth, Ci it looks as if it had seen service, Me. Rory.”

44 O! then it’s itself that has,” returned Me. Rory, taking it down, and blowing the dust off it : 44 many a tall fine fellow it laid low in its day, any how, I’ll engage.”

44 Indeed !” returned Lady Single-ton, looking round significantly at her party, while her daughters and Lady Florence turned pale : 44 so it has committed great havoc, has it?”

44 It’s truth I am telling you, Madam: the world would’nt gel the marks of the blood out of the blade, so it woukPnt : they say it is the blood of an O’Neil, which an O’Donnel killed in these verv

y

mountains.”

44 Indeed!” said Lady Singleton, becoming gradually the victim of her

e 2

v^vij luie imaginings :	aiiu	pray,	oir,

who does this sword belong to ?”

“ To the great O’Donne), my lady, who beat the English troops fairly out of the province.” '

“ Lately ?” asked Lady Singleton eagerly.

O %/	*

tc O yes,, Madam, that’s when the master’s people were kings of the county round, I may say; and bate the world before them, which they did in great style.”

“ You mean, I suppose,3’ asked Lady Singleton in a tremulous voice,, 44 in the late tumults which we have heard so much of in England, as disturbing this country?”

44 O yes, my Lady, I do ! — surely.” “ And pray, Sir?” asked Lady Singleton still more faintly, 4‘ do the White Boys, or the Oak Boys, prevail in these mountains ?”

44 O, my Lady,” returned Me. Rory, 44 we have no call to the likes of them

at all, at all ; there never was any ruction to signify in these mountains since the ould times, when the great O'Donnel Baldeargul, that’s 4 G’Don-nel the Red,’ cleared the country fairly with this same sword, of all the rogues and rapperies that wanted to drive us into the bogs and mountains like wild bastes, when he fought at, the battle of BaVmtubber for the glory of Ireland/’

44 And this O'Donne I the Red,” said Mr. Glentworth, who had been much amused with the equivoque of a dialogue he had hitherto forborne to in-terrupt ;	44	and	this	O’Donnel the Red

was, I suppose, some famous ancestor of your master ?”

44 O ! lie was your Honor, the 4 Star of the North’ he 'is call’d to this dav, —long life to him!”

44 An ancestor !” repeated Lady Singleton, recovering from her transient panic: 44 oh, that is another thing.”

“ Stay, Madam !’’ exclaimed Me. Kory in a hurry, putting up the sword, and running to a book-shelf, from which he took down a little volume in ' primmer size: ‘"see here, my Lady, sure here is thj^ whole story, covered with elegant red moroclcij ; and, troth, and it will amuse you greatly till the master comes; you,ll be highly delighted with it, I’ll engage ; —myself used to get it by heart of a winter’s night :	that’s the fine ancient ould

copy of it, which was wrote with Abbé O’Bunnel’s own hand, but the master got this done out fairly by the Torney Costello’s clerk;’’

Lady Singleton took the book: it contained but a few pages, and was done in a neat printed hand. Me. Rory trimmed the lamp, put fresh turf on the fire, and wishing them t£ every amusement in life,” left the room ; and, at the request of all, Lady Singleton read as follows:—

O’DONNEL THE RED,

OR

THE CHIEFS OF TIRCONNEL.

A FRAGMENT.

The Irish annalist has boasted, —the English historian has avowed, that Ireland first submitted to England in the reign of James the First ; and his Irish subjects fondly believed that in his veins flowed the blood of their own iwyal line.*

Till that period, the English settled in Ireland, neither “ governed the land in peace by law,']* nor could they

* It was not till the 12th of James I. 1(514, that the Irish were considered as subjects,” they <c were then taken into his Majesty’s gracious protection, under one law, as dutiful subjects/” — Borlase, p. 188,

+ Sir J. Davis.

B 4

root out the natives by the sword in war.”*

Till that period, the few eastern districts which the Saxon arms had won, were, by harassing encroachments^ partially extended ; but the Irish chiefs of the north, of the south, and of the west, nay, even those who raised their castles on the borders of the pale, were of necessity left to the enjoyment of their own rude independence, j* Their septs in the days of

* They offered the English sovereign 8000 marks to grant them the benefit of the English law. and 'were refused. (See Sir J. Davis's Historical Relations ) They were, therefore, governed by their own laws so recently as the reign of Henry VIÏL for the then Chief Baron observes, u Those laws and statutes made by the Irish on their hills they keep firm and stable, without breaking them for any favor or reward.”— Baron Fingloss, Breviate of Ireland.

+ .As in the instance of the O'Beirnesy Chiefs of G lew-Malu va.

Elisabeth, as in the days of Henry the Second, paid submission only to their respective chiefs, and lived in federal alliance with each other. When in amity with the English power, they were termed friends and allies;* when refractory, they were called “ the Irish enemy?' The epithet of rebel was not applied to them, till, by being admitted to the benefit of the English laws, they were considered as subjects, which did not take place till the twelfth year of James the First’s reign.

In the latter days of Queen Elizabeth, flourished Calvagh O’Donnel, chief of Pirconnel.j*

On the north-west of Ulster, over a region of rocks and marshes, of lakes

* u They were sworn to keep the peace, but in every other particular retained their own distinctions and independence.”—Leland, Vo. lame cl.

+ Tirconnel, modern Donegal.

N

and mountains deeply indented with the sea, and skirted by precipitous head-lands, the chiefs of Tirconnel had reigned in a regular, though not tranquil, succession from the tenth century.

Their national title was Tanist, or Chief: that bestowed on them by foreign potentates bore a loftier sound :—-Henry III. of England,* solicited their alliance by the title of “ King;”m\ Fran-

* The letter of Henry III. to the Irish Chief 5s extant in RymcrVolume 1. page 426. In which ho writes to him, Ilex Donaldo, Regi tie Tirconnel, Sahitcm.”

f Francis I. failed to iuducc the Irish Chief to unite with him against Henry VIII. And James /. acknowledges the hereditary fealty and attchment of the O’DonncIs to (he Crown of England, until the Irish Lords, President, and Deputies, drove O’Donnel the Red to desperation in Elizabeth's reign: this acknowledgment is made in the King’s letter to Earl Rod wick O’Donnel, the brother of the deposed Chief, extant in the Irish Rolls*

cis I. of France, sought their assistance by the name of 66 Sovereign Prince and the Roman Pontiff and Spanish Monarch gave them these titles so lately as in the days of Elizabeth.

%/ 8/

To the chiefs of Tirconnel stood opposed the powerful sept of the O Neils, chiefs of Tyrone : descended from the same stock, they were yet hereditary rivals, and waged a warfare for ages against each other, under the operation of all those passions which break out with greatest violence among a people unsophisticated and unrefined.* Hugh O'Neil, the celebrated Earl of Tyrone, alternately the favorite and the foe of Queen Elizabeth, who, in the end, threw off allegiance with his English Earldom, and re-assumed the state and independence of

* ft was between these haughty Chiefs that the well known anecdote occurred of u pay ms my tribute or else,” &c. &c. &c.

an Irish Prince,* saw, and loved, the Lady Johanna O’Donnel ;*]* and the fends of ages were extinguished upon the altar of family alliance. — The fair daughter of Tirconnel became Coun-tess of Tirrwcn, and the nuptials were celebrated in the Castle of Donegal, in all the rude magnificence of the times and consequence of the parties.

The septs pledged each other in draughts of meadh from the Corna, which had so often sounded them to battleand the bards of the O’Neils and of the O’Donnels swept their harps to the praises of the descendants of u Niall of the Nine HostagesN

* Annals of (he Four Masters.

•f Hugh O’Neil, Baron of Dungannon, Jived much in the court of Elizabeth, had command of a troop of horse, and received letlers under the great seal of England for the Earldom of Tyrone, Xc-—See Morris's Ireland.

J See li 'teend of the Volume.

FRAGMENT II.

The nuptial feast, according to the boundless hospitality of the times, was held for many days ; and the carousal was only interrupted by an event, which spread desolation and misery in the House of O’Donnei,- caused the annihilation of its glory, and gave birth to conflicts, from which Ireland had not recovered at the end of the succeeding century.*

In the family of the Chief of Tircon-nel a star had arisen, which, though but just verging above the horizon of life, already shed around a light, des-

J	%/	O'

tined never to be quenched but with the independence of the huici, which it

* The successes of O’Donuel and O’Neil had unquestionably a great influence upon English aiiaiis in Ireland, for a considerable time after even the death of those celebiaied chiefs.

for a brief period illuminated. Hugh O’Donnel, called O’Donnel the lied,,* the eldest son of Calvagh, a boy in years, a hero in spirit, a being “out of the common roll of men,” had already given proofs of such extraordinary valour and virtue, that in the language of the chronicle 44 his tame had çone throughout the land/’”)* He had assisted at the nuptials of his beautiful sister, and on the third'night of the carousal, had'risen from the nocturnal revels to enjoy the fresh sea breeze on the ramparts of the castle: thither he had been followed by two young and

* O’Donnel Baldcargue, or O’Donnel Roue, from a red mark in the centre of his forehead.

i Sec note at the end of the volume. All the accounts given of this Chief, botli by friends and enemies^ represent him as a most extraordinary person.—See Lcland, Abbé Oseaghagan, Annals of the Four Masters, S;c:	lie	was	as remarka-

ble for his eloquence and personal beauty as for his humanity and military prowess.

gallant friends, John and Henry O'Neil. As they descended towards the shore*, a sound sweeter than their native harp caught their ear; it came from a rocky cove, where a Spanish vessel, which had put in a few days before, lay anchored.

This ship was said to be the property of a Cadiz merchant, and had furnished out the marriage feast with the racy wines and luscious fruits of Iberia. The Spanish captain had, by his urbanity and fair dealing, won golden opinions from the inhabitants of the town and Castle of Donegal, and received a promise from the younger chiefs to pledge him to the health of his king on board his vessel.

As G’Donnel and his friends approached the cove, they perceived a Spanish minstrel seated on the prow of the bark, and accompanying with his mandoline the sweet strain which he had raised over the stillness of the moonlight waters. The youths ap-

proached and mounted the deck : the minstrel changed to a bolder measure. , He sung of the common orgin of the Spanish and Irish nations, of the prowess of the Sons of Miiesius; of the times gone bye when the O’Donncis raised the standard of their blood-red cross in the fields of Arragon against the Pagan Moors.* The spirits of the listening youth kindled at the song of •the strangers: G’Dounel pointed to the cannon mounted on the ramparts*]* of his castle, which the King of Spain had presented to his father. The captain of the vessel sent round the cup, and pledged the chi els in the name of his sovereign. Thesailots who manned .the vessel, a hardy band, crowded on the deck, gazed with respectful wonder

* In all the accounts of the capture of the young O’Donnel, these arts of seduction were attributed to the feigned captain of the vessel.

+ ilistoric.

on the grandeur of the young chiefs powerful figure; approached — surrounded him.

FRAGMENT III.

It was midnight—the torches were extinguished in the Castle of Donegal ; the watch-fires on the forgard were lighted. The warder paced the ram-. parts, and threw from time to time a look towards the beach, for the young chief and his friends had not yet returned from their visit to the Spanish vessel.

The moon went down ; a profound darkness settled over the face of the deep ; no noise was heard but the murmur of the refluent tide. The dawn broke, the night-guard was relieved. The warder descended the rock towards the sea-side ; he secretly condemned the want of dignity in the

young Irish Lords, who condescended to join in the nocturnal vassaiiage of a foreign trader : lie turned Ids eyes towards the cove where the vessel had been moored, but he saw not the glittering of the white sails amidst the darkness of the cliffs.—He turned his eyes to the north, and to the south, to the east, and to the west ; but all, to the utmost verge of the horizon, was one broad expanse of illuminated waters. The sun rose magnificently from the ocean, but no vessel speckled its placid bosom. The truth flashed like lightning on the warder's mind— the heir of Tirconnel was carried off by a stratagem; he flew to the castle with the intelligence, but he had not power to tell the tale to the aged father: he fell speechless at the feet of the venerable chief.

FRAGMENT IV.

The seeming Spanish vessel was an English frigate, fitted out I>y the Lord Deputy Ferrot, for the purpose of betraying into his power the young heir of Tireonnei. The youth and his friends,, surrounded and overcome by numbers, wereplaced underthe hatches» conveyed to Dublin Lastle, and thrown in the depths of a noisome dungeon. The reason assigned for this act of treachery, which filled a whole province with dismay, was, that the Earl of Tyrone having married the Lady Q’Donnel, he would inevitably seduce the chief, his brother-in-law, to unite the forces of Tireonnei to those of Tyrone, in opposition to the English power, from which the Earl was suspected "of deserting; and that the great promise of the youthful chief bespoke

a fearful enemy in future times.* Five years elapsed ; and the first emotions of rage and grief, which preyed upon the life of the young O’Donnel, resolved themselves into a rooted principle of hatred, to oppression, and vengeance on his own oppressors. Of the feelings which belonged to his age, hope only remained ; and her cheering dream was nearly realized by the ingenuity and efforts of his young fellow-sufferers. The O’Neils, less strictly guarded, because of less consequence than O’Donnel, contrived their own and their friend’s escape, broke his chains, and unsuspected, unobserved, in tlie midst of darkness and of dansrer

o y

* Annals of the Four Masters. Others assert that Sir J. Perrot, by this act, sought to conciliate the English government, whom he had displeased by his lenient measures in Ireland. Although, however, Sir J. Perrot planned this fell erne, ihe severity of its execution was left to his successor, Sir. W. Fitzwilliam.

crossed the castle fosse, escaped the vigilance of the guards, and fled to the Wicklow mountains. Overcome at last by suffering and fatigue, torn and wounded by the briery underwood? which crept over their perilous and unfrequented paths, they at last grew desperate, approached a human dwelling, and sounded the horn that hung

OJ	C

suspended at the gate of the Castle of CVTool. The warder appeared, and they claimed protection for the son of the great G’Donnel, of Tirconnel. O’Tool granted a seeming protection, but betrayed his trust. The next day the young chief was delivered into the hands of the English government, conveyed to the Castle of Dublin, and with his young and faithful friends, was again consigned to captivity, and loaded with irons heavier than before.*

* 6i His manner of usage was most dishonorable and discommendable, and neither allowable

Another two years of captivity elapsed, when the attachment of one of the warders of the castle to his young: and unfortunate prisoner again procured his escape.* His keeper knocked off his irons, and conducted him and his friends bevond the gates

*/	O

of the city. The fugitives fled once more to the intricate wilds of the Wicklow mountains, where the passes were alone unguarded. The depth of the snows, the darkness and horrors of the night, the apprehension of pursuit, distracted and bewildered the unhappy

"before God or man : for O’Donncl being young, and being taken by this stratagem, having never offended, was imprisoned with great severity, and many irons laid upon him, as if he had been a notable traitor,” &c.—Lee's Memorial to Queen Elizabeth. t\ISS.Trinity College.

* The great tic which existed between the keeper and his prisoner was, that he spoke Irish, says the Chronicle.

wanderers, and in the confusion and precipitancy of retreat, the j'ounger O'Neil vt as lost. The voices of his friends were in vain raised; in vain O’Don ne - and his brother turned back^ at the risk of liberty and life, to seek him—lie was gone for ever! In distraction and despair, the brother and the friend puxsuéd their dreary course, amidst the horrors of the night.* The strength of the surviving O’Neil failed. O'Donnel, more vigorous and robust, in vain supported him in his arms— O'Neil sunk under his sufferings. O’Donnel laid him under the shelter of a rock, in the A alley of Glendaloch ; stripped off his own wretched garb, and placed it over the shivering body of his friend.* and stretched himself beside him, in the hope of communicating warmth to his chilled and lifeless limbs.

* Annals of the Four Masters.' '	+ Ibid.

On the borders of the Valley of Glendaloch stood the Castle of Ma-luva, the ancient seat of the O’Beirnes. It was reserved for the chief of that powerful sept to discover, amidst the rocks which skreened his castle, two youths nearly buried in the snow: the one lay dead in the other’s arms; the other was speechless, yet he lived; and when the humane attentions of the chief, who summoned his attendants to the spot, restored the faculties of the survivor, QTIeirne found in the object of his charity the son of a prince !—the son of his own kinsman and friend, the Chief of Tir-connel !

The body of the unfortunate O’Neil was consigned to the xAbbey of Glendaloch.* O’Donnel was carried on the

* The ruins of this abbey arc still risible in the beautiful valley otGlendaloch, in the county of Wicklow.

UCi v O U I uUluC U1 vy M-J is L l ilC O	vv*

the defile of Glen-Maluva.* His name, his youth, his rank, his misfortunes, had gone before him. The clan of the 0 Beirnes came forth from their strong holds and castles to receive him. They met the northern chief, the descendant of the royal line of Eirin, with shouts of exultation, mingled with expressions of implacable animosity to his enemies.

%	%	%	%	#	4fs	#	#

The flight of the illustrious captive was soon discovered : the Lord Deputy posted guards on the fords of the Liffy, to prevent his escape ; but the chief of Glyn-Maluvaj true to his trusT. risked his own life to save his friend’s : he placed himself at the head of a troop .of horse, and conducted O’Donne! towards Dublin, foreseeing the security

J	O	%/

of the attempt in its unsuspected bold-

* Annals of the Four Masters.

VOL. II.	G

ness, as ne îmagmeu me lorcis so near the capital were carelessly guarded, and on the banks of the Liffy the friends embraced and parted. When the aged warrior wept, the eyes of the young chief were not dry; national suffering had not yet subdued national sensibility.

A messenger in disguise of a harper was sent before the fugitive, to prepare the old chief of Tirconnel for the return of ids son. Accompanied by eight horsemen only, O’Donnel took his perilous way through the heart of the English pale,* passing near many an English garrison, beholding in distance the night-fires of inanv an Irish Fausrh-

O	%/	O

* TIis way lay through Meath, Louth, Armagh, and Fermanagh. The ruins of the fortress of Ballyshannon still remain ; and the town takes its name from a ford, where the old chief ofTir-conncl was drowned.—Ballvshan F\ e. the mouth of the ford.

gard,^ retreating among the heights oî the mountainous region of Sleeve~gul~ lion, while the troops stationed in Bal-breken Castle wound along the river beneath : his heart heaved lightly when he caught a last view of Bose Castle,^ beat rapturously when he hehsid the blue waters of Lough Erne, and the banner of the chief of Fermanagh, floating on the mast of the barge which the brave Mc. Guire had prepared to carry him across the lake, to the foot of his father’s fortress at Ballyshannon. Soon distinguished by the friends of his House, the long stilled cry of “ O Don-

*' Faughguard—a fort on an eminence.

+ The frontier castle of the pale, on the western borders of Louth : it was built by Rose Verdun, an heiress of the English pale, who married Lord Bellew. According to (he Louthi-una^ it is still the property of the ancient family of Bellew, and exhibits a fine ruin.

c 2

nal aboo,*'” rent the air: borne in joyous triumph over the waters of the lake that bathed his native domains, he ■was received by the inhabitants of Tir-connel, who came in multitudes from the remotest districts, to hail the restoration of their betrayed chief to liberty» and to his conn try. *j* They knelt in his path ; they kissed his feet ; they clasped his hands ; and, in the midst of the acclamations of thousands of voices, the aged Lord of Tirconnel resigned his chieftaincy to his son, to give him a free scope to avenge his own injuries, and to protect his people. O’Phryle performed the ceremony of

* Each chieftain had a war cry peculiar to his sept; as O'Bonnel ubua~-Butler abua. The illustrious House of Fitzgerald, of which the Duke of Leinster is the head, have retained their’s as their motto : Grom a boo.

+ This account is strictly according. He was captured at fifteen, and escaped at oiie-and-twenty. Sec note end of this volume.

A/ JbJ U *N I!* L *

inauguration,# and the harpers of the family sung the feats of the heroes which it had produced, calling upon the new chief to emulate the glory of his ancestors.

FRAGMENT V.

The indignant feelings of personal oppression and injustice sharpened the sympathy of national suffering. The outrages committed by the Lords Presidents of Ulster and Connaught suffered not the wounded spirit of O*Donne! to heal. While his limbs were still galled from the weight of the chains he had miraculously broken, the protection of his arm was called for by the cries of his countrymen, j* All Ulster rose,

* A kind of Bardic priest ; the hereditary performer of this ceremony.

+ The injustice and atrocities committed on the Ulster and Connaught chiefs, by Bagnall and

and ranged itself under the red banner of the O' Donn cl and the O'Neil; and lie, whose \roungr.nd balmy blood had been so eariv “ turned to gall/’ whose warm

m.'	O	7

and amicable feelings had been so pre-

Bingham, in their presidencies, were by all co. temporary historians assigned as causes of the insurrection in those provinces. Queen Elizabeth •was so well assured of it, that she publicly accused them of their enormities, and thus alludes to it in her instructions to the Lord Deputy : u For that our subjects of that realm havo been grievously oppressed by certain ill-alfected of our garrisons serving there, which have been partly a cause of the alienation of the good-will which they (the Irish) before did bear unto us; and as such abuses as have hitherto been committed by such captains as have had heretofore more regard to their own particular profit, than to the discharge of their duties, may be met withal, &r. &c.”

Desiderata Curiosa IJibern. v&l. 1, p. 36.

Queen Elizabeth made frequent attempts in favor of the Irish ; u but her gracious intentions were neglected or disobeyed by her principal ministers in that kingdom.”

maturely roused ifito vindictiveness, teas elected the champion of the oppressed, and triumphantly styled by compatriots,

4i The invincible Hero of the North

for, in the successive conflicts which tore and distracted his country, he was Invincible.

The young chief of Tirconnel soon spread the fame of his prowess throughout the kingdom: those who had wept his unbought misfortunes,, now triumphed in his unequalled successes, [n a short space of time he had overrun the province of Connaught, restored those chiefs who had been deposed,* punished others who had be*

- The sheriffs andotber officers of the Lords President followed their example; entered th« several counties, attended with large bodies of armed men, pillaging the inhabitants whom they affected to despise.

Leland’s Hist, of Ireland, p. 302.

VT	-- ------

come apostate/* expelled the unjust stewards of an abused sovereign, and scattered those tf bands of landless resolutes who had been sharked upf” by borrowed power to spoliate his own possessions, and lay waste the land of his fathers.J Pursued by disciplined armies and distinguished leaders, he turned back upon their multitudinous forces with a desperate but successful valour; overcame the troops of the famous General Norris at the battle of the CurlieuSj and routed the English army, though led on by the gallant Clifford, in the plains of Dunaveeragh;.

* O’Rourke. f O’Connor Don.

+ A great part of (he unquietness of O’Don-nel’s country came by Sir W. Fitzwilliam placing there one IVillis as Sheriff, 'uho had with him three hundred of the very rascals and scum of the kingdom, who did rob and spoil the people, &c. &e.

Lee't Memorial to Queen Elizabeth, MSS.

Trinity College.

held parleys with the Essex’s and the Mountjoys, and won golden ©pinions” alike from the enemy he vanquished, and the friend he redressed.

FRAGMENT VI.

O’Donnel, covered with glory, retired to the Castle of Donegal, to celebrate his union with the fair object of a long-cherished and romantic passion, the Lady Avelina O’Neil, the daughter of the Earl of Tyrone, by a former marriage with an English lady, who had alone shared with his country the feelings of his heart. To years of suf-

Q	v

fering, disquietude, and hardships, some months of domestic felicity succeeded, when the family compact, formed by double alliance between the chiefs of Tirconnel and Tyrone, obliged him to draw his sword in a cause, which, unlike all the other contests in which

he had engaged, brought not its excuse along with it.

* IIis fortunes changed with the cause in which he was led by his ambitious kinsman to, embark them. The unexampled rapidity of his marches from the north to the south of Ireland ; his distinguished feats of personal prowess, availed him not : the red cross banner of the Q’Donnel was trampled in the dust before the walls of Kinsaie: his castle was seized, and garrisoned by the English forces in Donegal : his life was forfeited with Ids possessions; but his lirst and last defeat, though it maddened*, did not subdue him. After wandering, with a few faithful friends, through the bogs and mountains of

* 0'Donncl (says (he Irish Chronicle) grew desperate and furious, after his defeat at Kinsaie; *o liiat he would neither cat, nor drink, nor sleep, for three days and three nights successively.

Annals of the Four Masters*.

- Munster, with nothing left but his life, his honor, and his sword, he escaped an ignominious.death by flight from his native land; and, in the words of the chronicle, sailed, “ with his heroes for Spain/* a The little vessel in which he embarked anchored in the port of Corunna, 1602^, under the mouldering tower of Breogan,*|' named after the hero who was supposed to have raised it, and from whom the first conquerors of Ireland were descended.

The exile chief knelt and kissed the earth consecrated by the memory of his progenitor, and hailed the tower of the son of Mileseus, as a happy omen on the arrival of his descendant in a strange land.

# o # îo	%	#

The King of Spain received the Irish chief as a sovereign prince, promised

* Historical.

i Annals of the Four Masters,

him redress, and established him in a royai palace at Corunna. But the king slumbered over his promise, though the spirit of the chief slept not, Ireland, the land of his affections, was the goal of his hopes : soon weary of his splendid dependence, he panted to behold his country, his children, his wife: his patience brooked not delay : he had not been used to wait upon fortune, but to command her; though worn out, exhausted by bodily and mental anguish, he pursued the king to his court at Valladolid, and within view of the Moorish palace where the sovereign resided. The Irish chief died in the arms of his attendants :* his heart was broken; his gallant spirit fled for ever in its last struggle for independence :

Ci Peace to the soul of the hero.”

* Annals of the Four Masters,

CHAPTER 10

All pride, however diversified its features,, is the mere offspring of human weakness. In its best sense, perhaps, it is but the mean which gives to vanity the air of virtue ; in its worst, it is a puerile veneration for the accidental circumstances of life, a rigid exaction of respect from others, for things or qualities independent of all will or power inherent in ourselves.

The pride of the Irishman was immoderate. Still, however, it might find its apology, if not its justification, in the circumstances of his life, and the history of his family. The one had been an incessant strus'ade between a lofty spirit, and an untoward fortune; the other was a register of the deeds of

chiefs, of the feats of heroes ; interwoven in the history of his country, sharing its glory, and participating in its misfortunes. This high and in he-rent sentiment, nurtured rather than weakened by physical sensibility, sharpened rather than obliterated by moral suffering, was now deeply wounded, not in its most vulnerable, but its least laudable point ; not where it was felt; with most acuteness, but where it was sustained with least dig-nity. Though one u out of suits with life,” he disdained complaint, he contemned pity, and shrunk from displaying his unhappy fortunes before those from whom he could not hope for sympathy, nor have accepted relief. The chalices were now, however, against him: he was bailed to his den; and what was still worse, he had exposed a weakness of feeling ; he had deprived poverty of that dignity, which could alone have rendered it respectable.

«

Blushing for the involuntary error of mortified pride, and anxious to repair it. he returned to his guests just as Lady Singleton had laid aside the little historical fragment of his family memoirs ; and with all the sterner feelings of his nature, relaxed into the smooth courtesy of high and polished refinement, he apologized for his absence, and excused it b}' the arrival of some letters from the continent, in which he was much interested, though they contained no public news. Meantime the ladies discovered that not only his manner, but his appearance, was much improved: he had changed the rude habit of his wanderings, the thread-barejacket^ which had shrouded his gentility from Mr. Dexter’s eyes and observation, for a suit of deep mourning. With an excusable foppery, natural to the soldier, he had also assumed the order of Maria Theresa, and the cross of St. Louis, both the badges of distinguished,

military merit; and though in his marked and intelligent countenance a mind was depicted which

O’er informed its tenement of clay,”

yet the enchantment of a noble form absorbed his spectators in the first moment of his return, and left them no leisure to reflect upon the moral superiority by which it was evidently accompanied and dignified.

As soon as he entered the room, he informed Mr. Glentworth that he had procured a messenger,from a neighbouring cabin, to go to the town for proper workmen to refit the broken vehicle, and begged to know if he had any commands of which the man might be the bearer.

Lady Singleton, having suggested the necessity of acquainting their fellow travellers with their situation and misfortunes, wrote a note of three pages to Mr. Dexter, made up of or*

ders and reproaches, interwoven parenthesis within parenthesis.

44 And now/’ said Colonel O’Don-nel, assuming a cheerful face, 44 I shall not importune you with apologies or excuses : the master of a hut can only offer the best his hut affords; and, to confess the truth, mine contains but one sleeping room, and an adjoining closet with a camp bed; yet are there five fair candidates for a complete repose after so mnch discomfort and fatigue.’*

44 And does this old sofa go for no-ihing?*1 said Lady Singleton. “Leave it to me, Colonel. I remember travelling in Germany with some men of very high fashion, and we all were obliged to sleep in one wretched apartment upon mattrasses.”

Lady Singleton then went to look at the rooms, and make arrangements herself, and on her return it was settled, with much s:ood humor, that the sofa

was to be wheeled into the bed-room.

*

and prepared by the old woman, to the best of her ability, for the accommodation of the ladies ; and that Mr.

G lent worth should têle-à-tcle with his host in an arm chair: the party then surrounded the tea-table, at which the governess presided, and conversation circulated with freedom and gaiety ; for the absence of the two vapid men of fashion, and the pert presumptuous man of no fashion, was a sensible relief to the Irish host.

Surrounded by women thrown upon his hospitality, and in communion with a man whose liberal and enlightened mind assimilated with lus own, O’Donnel gradually unfolded into confidence, and brightened into cheerfulness. A true Irishman — warmly reflected upon by the circumstances of society, his spirits took their tone from his situation ; and his conversation, at once amusing and desultory, was bril-

liant as the eyes, from whence, perhaps, after alh he chiefly drew his inspiration.

tc But, Colonel O’Donne],3* said Lady Singleton, admiring some remark he had made in unison with her own opinion, “ I cannot at ail understand

4.	7

how a man of your time of life, professional rank, talents, and accomplishments, can choose to bury yourself in this wild and solitary place.*’

G’Donnel bowed to the compliment, and replied to the curiosity which had given birth toit: “ It is not, Madam, exactly a matter of choice

“ Oh dear ! then, I dare say your history is quite a romance ; pray indulge us with a little biographical sketch.”

s	,

“ You do not, my dear, consider,’3 said Mr. G lent worth, “ that our short acquaintance with Colonel O Donnel does not warrant this intrusion- upon his confidence, and that we are already too much his debtors to,...33

61 There is nothing,” interrupted O’Donne], “ in my short life worthy your attention., nor has it even the merit of singularity. It is an oft-told tale, repeated in my family from generation to generation, for three hundred years back.”

“ Any tale of which you are the hero,” said Lady Florence, with a smile full of blandishment, “ cannot fail to interest us.”

“ Your Ladyship is very flattering,’' he returned, slightly colouring, as he met those soft eyes which gave so good a comment upon the text her lips had expounded ; “ but in this instance I must believe with Rousseau, that, *7 vaut mieux offenser les grandes dames, que de les ennuyer; which inevitably would be the case, if I became the hero of my own story.”

“ You are quite mistaken,” cried Lady Singleton : “ a story never can ennuyer : we have already been enter-

rained beyond every thing with a little family romance of your’s, put into our Lands by Me. Rory, called c O’Donnel the Red pray, was he an ancestor of your’s, Colonel O’Donnel ?’’

“ My immediate ancestor, Madam/* he replied ;—“ a very brave and very unfortunate man, who lived the Lord of this region, and died with only this sword to bequeath his posterity.’5 Mr. Glentworth made some just observations on the causes which had driven the chief of Tirconnel to the measures he had adopted and Lady Florence said that Colonel C’Donnel must be amazingly vain of being the descendant of such a hero.

“ No, Madam,’* he replied:	“	I

may say in this instance, as the old Earl of Tyrone did, when his harper, striking up a martial strain, sung the heroic conduct of. his ancestors : c i ambition not so much/ said he, c to derive honor from my ancestors, as to

reflect back upon them the lustre they* have shed upon me/—î am however justly proud of the character and virtues of Hugh O’Donnel.”

“ I am astonished I never heard of this O’Donnel,” said Lady Singleton, “ for I am a pretty good historian/*

“ Yon will find his name mentioned with honor/5 he returned, “ in all the histories of Ireland, whethe r traced by her enemies or her friends.* But Ï believe the most authentic, though the simplest account of him, will be found in the old national chronicle, called the Annals of the Four Masters, from which the pages you have read are extracted/5

As he spoke, he took the volume which layon the desk,and running over its pages, he said : u This is one of our most curious chronicles extant. The late master of this retreat, my dearest

* See note at the ctul of the volume.

friend and nearest kinsman, was engaged in translating from it the history of our family, when death closed his own. Here is a part of his manuscript, which his own hands placed among these pages.”

The stranger sighed deeply; and every one examined ihe book, and the loose leaves it contained: they were a rough draught of the fair copy from which Lady Singleton had read the little story of the chief.

“ You must perceive,” said their host, “ that what has been done by my late venerable kinsman, has been done carelessly, and is indeed rather a loose abridgment than a just translation, exhibiting that want of connection so frequently obvious in the last efforts of declining intellect, when all links of association hold feebly together, when the mind only recovers itself by starts, and imagination^ if not wholly extinguished, sends forth but brief and sud-

den sparKs nom us decaying nres : ana yet the author of these feeble fragments, the original of that interesting picture (pointing to the portrait im-pannelled in the door) had once nerve, spirit, and talents, adequate to fill the highest station, to crown the boldest enterprise. The Abbé O’Donnel distinguished himself in the diplomacy of Spain. His services, however, though less known than felt, were marked rather by their success than their recompense.”

44 It is lamentable/’ said Mr. Glent-worfh, 4f that talents, so rarely found, should be employed in the service of any country but their own.”

14 True,” said O’Donnel, 44 it is indeed lamentable—destructive to the country, and fatal to the individual. But to command the services of genius, it must be unrestricted. It is the equal right, the equal hope, shining on all alike, which gives vigor to ability, and

•.a right direction to the vague impulses of ambition. Sink the individual in the scale of social consideration, withdraw from him the natural motives which should give strength to resolution, and energy to action, and you banish or degrade him : he remains at home, alternating between the torpor of disgraceful indolence, and the wildness of sullen disaffection ; or he retires to other countries to offer those talents» those energies to foreign states, for which he finds no mart at home. Like the liquid element, the human mind flows cloudy and polluted through narrow and prescribed channels, and derives its brilliancy, its purity, its wholesomeness, and its utility, alone from the freedom of its course, and the agitation of its own natural and unrestrained motions.

“ To this alternative of idleness or banishment, were the gentlemen of Ireland reduced by religious disquali-

VQL. ii.	D

fication, at the period when the original of that picture, accompanied by a younger brother, bid adieu to the land of his fathers. The brothers offered their services in causes with which their feelings held no alliance. The younger O’Donnel entered the Austrian service, where so many of his kinsmen had already distinguished themselves. He rapidly attained the rank of a general officer—lived in honor, and died in glory. The elder brother, with an early imbibed taste for philosophical diplomacy, became an efficient agent in the court of Madrid, and expiated his illusion by his disappointment. He found himself involved in the narrow and illiberal views of a crooked and intricate policy, and discovered, too late, that the labors of an unfortunate alien,, received alternately with a necessary confidence and a natural distrust, are viewed with suspi-çion and rewarded with parsimony.

in a moment or uns meiauuuuiy tu»-viction, his strong passions, ever veering to extremes, he abandoned the world, and threw himself into the Abbey of La Trappe.* He was soon, however, again sought for, because his talents were soon missed ; and the royal entreaty and papal authority once more dragged him on the scene of life, at the moment he was found digging his own grave. Yet when death, after a course of years, robbed him of the prince he served, he remained unrecompensed, unprovided for, advanced in life, and care-worn in spirits. Then it was that his affections (having completed the circle of objects which in turn possess the bosom, and mark the stages from the cradle to the tomb) returned to the goal from whence they started. His country, his home,awakened his heart's

* See the account of Abbé Hussy in Cumberland’s Life.

D 2

jrt^t wciIhj impulsion ; ana rne iona desire, so common among the Irish, that his eyes should he closed by the hands of kindred affection, led him back to that paternal roof, and to those ties, whose images time and absence had rather strengthened than obliterated frorn his remembrance. He had left an elder brother, the representative of the faded honors and lessened fortunes of his family ; and to the sons of this brother he looked forward for the bright reflections of his own ardent youth—for the solace of his declining years. He returned after thirty years of exile ; but found nor home, nor brother, nor brother’s children.”

The stranger paused ; then, witfy some emotion, and great rapidity, he added :

“ There was at the period to which I allude a penal statute* in force,

* This law, which in the present age requires nolle, be characterise J by its appropriate epi-

O DONNE L.

which struck at once against the law ôf God and man, and tore asunder the holy bond, which forms the type of every human institution—the tie of Jilictl and parental love. By this law, it was enacted, that the son of a Catholic parent, by conformity to the establish** ed church, could legally possess himself of the property of his family, and for ever alienate it (when so gained) from the rightful heirs. A crime thus, sanctioned, did sometimes, not often, find its motive in the sordid selfishness of human depravity. Oh! then many

'> thets, was enacted at a period when the worst passions were admitted to legislate for Ireland, It has long since ceased to disgrace the Statute Book, the abrogation of it being one among the first remissions in the severity of our penal code. The legislation of every country has had some cause for blushing; and if we have fallen upon happier times, let us pity rather than reproach the errors of our ancestors ; or rather let us forget them for ever.

Ot	U	DUiiiSXiL*

a blessed tie was rent asunder—many a grey head was bowed with shame and sorrow to the grave. The offence was neither solitary nor u iproductive. Brother raised Iris hand against brother.”.... He paused again in emotion, and again continued “ in a word, such was the event which hailed the Abbe’s return to his country.—The youngest of his two nephews had abjured a faith which only in tailed misfortune, and reaped the fruits of his apostacy by taking the letter of the law, and leaving his family and its natural heir destitute, who, maddened with the double wrongs of himself and his infant son, gave vent to nature’s bitterest indignation. The brothers fought—-fra-

O	O

tricide was added to apostacy; and the survivor, not able to appear on the scene of his crimes, left his country for ever.

“ He who was thus at once bereaved ®Fproperty and life was—my father J

“ The exile, thus welcomed to his native land, sought his last asylum among these mountains ; and, with the poor remains of his hard earnings, raised this shed, in a region over which his an. cestors had reigned, and at no great distance from the rock,, oh which, in ruder times, they were inaugurated. Here, too, he watched over the infancy and boyhood of his orphan grand-nephew ; and gave up the first sixteen years of his solitude to my education thus, but for him, I should have remained for ever 4 one of the wild shrubs of the wilderness to his learning and science am I indebted for whatever information 1 possess : to his taste I owe that cultivation of mind and love of letters which is now almost my only enjoyment.

“ Having thus bestowed upon me all *

* See note at the end of the volume.

that he had to give, he sent me, as he himself had been sent, to earn an honorable subsistence in a foreign land. After many years of absence, the public events which changed the face of Europe once more brought me back to these solitudes. I returned with that sword, which I had taken out with me, my only property, and this ribbon, my only reward.. I found my venerable kinsman, with the extraordinary energies of his character still unsubdued,approaching to a patriarchal age, and still devoting his lingering faculties to letters and to science. Permitted at length to serve my king and country, I again left the asylum of my early home, and drew my sword with a joyful emotion, suited to the cause in which i was allowed to embark ; but on mv return from a..

7	*/

short and fatal campaign in the West Indies, circumstances of necessity, as well as feelings of attachment, drew me back to these solitudes ; and I arrived but

O DONKEL.	67

/

in time to fulfil my aged kinsman’s long-formed wish.—He died in my arms, and his eyes were closed by the hand of kindred affection.”

The stranger ceased : he had been listened to with attention ; but there were few among his audit ors who h;d directed their interest to the point which naturally called for it. They thought not of causes3 though they, were moved by effects. Even the matter of the relation struck them less than the manner. It was the rapid modulation of the speaker’s voice; the changeful expression of his countenance : it was the warm effusion of a soul prone to enthusiasm ; it was the ' language dictated in the energy and emphasis of the heart which charmed their imagination, and held attention captive.

Mr. Glentworth sighed and was silent ; Lady Florence fixed her full eves on the narrator’s face : and Ladv

£3	O	DON	N	EL»

“ I wish you would give me the heads of* this little story, Colonel O’Donnel. I know a lady who would work it into a charming pathetic tale. I am very glad those stupid penal laws are at an end : 1 suppose they are all long since repealed

“ Not all ” said O’Donnel smiling. tf It is but just, however, to say, that the wisdom and policy of the present times have done much towards their to-tal abrogation ; and that great and no-, ble sacrifices have been made of ancient prejudices and exclusive privilege, to. general benevolence and national pros-, peri tv. To these sacrifices I pay a willing tribute of praise and gratitude; for I do not agree with Fra Paolo*’ that mai atcano si prétende obligato a chi riuibbl fatto giastilia. I acknowledge the good that has been done* and 1 look forward with patient expect-.

ation for the final completion of this great work of natural justice.5’

46 V\re have already clone so much,” said Mr. Glentvvorth, laughing, “ that I suppose you think we may as well throw you in the little that remains. For myself,” he added, more seriously? c; I have always felt an interest for this country, for which, it has been truly said, God has done so much and man so little; and I have always lamented those religious disqualifications, which, in all countries and in all ages, have equally produced evil to the rulers and to the people. The penal statutes of Queen Ann against her Catholic subjects ; and the revocation of the edict of Nantz by Louis XIV. the exterminator of French Protestants, are alike, in my opinion, as abhorrent from good policy, as they are shocking to good feeling ; nor can any thing be imagined more injurious to the cause of all relP gion, than thus to arm it with the aq-

v v	w A/ 'V A ' A ' -*-* AJ •

thority of the law, and make it the scourge of opinion. To

Employ the countenance and grace of Heaven, As a false favorite doth his prince’s name In deeds dishonorable,

Is surely the worst impiety.”

“ Oh ! then/’ said O’Donnel, with enthusiasm, liberal and enlightened^ benevolent and temperate, as you appear, remain amongst us. Extend your pacificating influence to the utmost verge of your sphere ; and encourage by the success of your example our other great English landholders, who draw their ample revenues from our plenteous soil, to visit, to know, and to acknowledge us. Let them come with minds detached from every bias which can influence passion, or revive prejudice : let them come unfettered by office, unsuing for place—more prompt to heal than to irritate, to sooth than to excite. With such high examples of conciliation, we should sleep over the

XJ V	Xi	iJ	»	w	-

memory of sufferings, which, whether inevitable or unjust, are passed by, and would, indeed, be forgotten, were they not industriously revived by many a commemorating distinction ; for though the tint of a flower, or the colour of a ribbon; the echo of a song, or the triumph of a toast ; be but idle and puerile causes of irritation ; yet upon imaginations, too prone, perhaps, to kindle; upon hearts too prompt to feel; upon spirits, which, though yielding to conciliation, are yet too apt to swell against the appearance of insult ; they must, and do, produce a more than adequate effect, and are borne, perhaps, with less patience than more serious grievances/’*

* Les personnes, a qui la fortune n’est pas trop favorable, sont je ne say comment plus soup çonneuses que les autres, et prennent tout en mauvaise part.

Terence de Dacier. Les A del plie s»

U Z,	u

The stranger paused abruptly: “ I fear ,’ he added, “ you will think me an enthusiast: I am nothing less;—at least I would not be one, but the little circle in which I am now placed is not calculated to chill reflection, or subdiie fervor. The imagination of an Irishman will kindle when his country is his subject, and woman his auditor: and an Irishman’s heart will expand when an Englishman advocates the cause of Ireland ; sympathizes in her destiny, and acknowledges her merits.”

O’Donnel, with that brilliant illumination of countenance which caught its fire from the soul, stretched out his hand to Mr. Gientworth, who shook it with cordiality and emotion.

4t I shall not,” he said, “ Colonel O’Donnel, love and admire this country less for having known one who reflects so much honor upon it.”

a I assure you, Colonel O’Donnel,” observed Ladv Sinsdeton, “Hike your

O DONNEE.	Ô3

enthusiasm of all things ; and I wish it was bon-ton in London to be enthusiastic ; but it is not. I was myself quite an enthusiast when I was abroad : by the bye, I wonder we never met. You say you were for twelve years upon the continent.”

In the Austrian service, I suppose, Sir ?” said Mr. Glentworth.^

I served six years in the Austrian service,” he replied. The name of O’Donnel carried a certain influence with it, from the fortunes of my kinsmen, one of whom, at the time I entered the service, was Field-Marshal, Governor-General of Transylvania; and Grand Croix of the military7 order of St. Theresa.* My rapid promotion followed of course ; and an act of boyish temerity7 was so far rewarded beyond its merits, that I was made by

* This General OrDonnel vas a gréât

■» ahUa n rl f n'nnd nf f îin F m	O IIP rtU Ç

bA>	ODONNEL.

the imperial order Lieutenant-Colonel of the Emperor’s Body Guards. But this irregular promotion of a foreigner over the heads of a national corps was not suffered to pass unnoticed, and the intruder had literally to fight his way to the distinction vainly lavished on him by the sovereign. Every officer was anxious to prove my claim on the point of his sword. After being wounded in the sword arm, 1 declined contesting the matter further. I felt that these brave men were right ;* I felt too that I was a stranger; and with the folly of a hot-headed Irishman, 1 yielded to my first impression of mortified pride, aud took my leave of the Court of Vienna, receiving this order as a bouquet iVadieu, and a letter of introduction from the Emperor to his illustrious kinswoman, the beautiful and unfortunate Maria Antoinette.

* Caa nn(n 'I <■	nr\	fl	rnllimp.

Thus presented., I could not fail to succeed. In a few years service I had risen to the rank of Colonel of Cuirassiers, when the French revolution took place.

“ A devotion to hereditary monarchy has always been attributed to the Irish gentry, even by their enemies. To this of old they owe their misfortunes; to this in the present times they may. look for the full restitution of their rights. With an inconsiderably few exceptions, the Irish gentlemen, whose misfortunes had driven them into the French service, were faithful and loyal to the king they served, as they would have been, if so permitted, to the natural sovereign of their native realms. The six regiments of Irish brigades were, to a man, true to the cause of royalty; and after fighting well, and suffering much, in the allied armies, the officers repaired to their native land, obtained leave to raise regiments, sue-

ceeded in the attempt, and were permitted to enroll themselves in the British army, under their old designation of the Irish Brigades»* I had followed the course of these brave men, and when sinking ruder infirm health, from two wounds which had nearly proved fatal, I was ordered to try my native air. Obliged to leave the army in Flanders, where I was serving as a volunteer, 1 again, on my recovery, joined the new-raised corps of a friend and fellow soldier; and too happy to be employed in the service of England against regicide France3 1 accepted a majority in the** regiment of Irish brigades, and embarked for St. Domingo. There, in a sanguinary and remorseless war, contending with the climate, famine, and the sword, amidst royalists and republicans, negroes and maroons, I left many a gallant countryman and

* See note at tbc'cnd of the volume.

friend unburied on the burning sands of that pestiferous region ; and have returned once more to these solitudes, perhaps, as their last tenant used to say, with 4 little else to do than to dig my own grave and die/*

This was uttered with a smile, but it was a smile saddened by despondency.

* u You surely do not mean to give up the service ?” asked Mr. Gient-worth.

44 The service, I fear,” he replied, *'4 means to give me 11 p.*'

44 Have you applied for, or been refused, your military rank ?”

14 I have no interest in this country, no kinsman high in the service; and my letters of nobility, which served me abroad, would here be ridiculous.” 44 Still you ought to have applied/” 44 I did apply, for a majority, a company, a lieutenancy : * I did not suc-

* Sçe note at the end of the volume.

ceed, and I went no lower. My relation, General O’Donnel, of the Spanish service, has offered me a majority in his own regiment ; but having once fought in the cause of England, I will never draw my sword against her. But/* he added cheerfully, 14 though I state facts, I do not complain of grievances. I know not how I have been \ nduced to enter upon this tale of egotism : it is in truth an ungracious subject to me, as it must be tiresome to you.”

He then gave a new turn to the conversation, by displaying some very fine fossils, which he had himself collected ; and shortly afterwards the ladies retired for the night.

CHAPTER 11

The next morning Mr. Glentworth and his host walked to the heath before the ladies had risers and found the workmen employed upon the carriage, which was by no means so much injured as might have been supposed, and which would be ready before noon for use.

On their return to the cottage they found the ladies at the breakfast-table, and Me. Rory, though he had relieved guard on the carriage in the middle of the n;ght, brisk, and busied in attendance; doing the honors by the griddle cake, pledging himself for the freshness of the eggs, and eulogising Kaily MaU Joy's elegant butter, which was in the churn surely not one hour ago, my Lady.

>v nen me sanitations or tne morn-ing were mutually exchanged, Lady Florence declared she had dreamed of Irish chiefs and heroes the whole night :	the young ladies expressed

their pretty fears, to which the dashing of the torrent had given birth every time they awoke ; and Lady Singleton observed that she had never closed her eves all night, from the vaiielv of

4.	O	%>

schemes and plans which were work*, ing in her brain, relative to a new mode of legislation for Ireland;—to cultivating bogs, opening loads through mountains, and raising a supplementary corps in addition to the Ballynogue Legion, of which she should make Colonel O’Donnel the captain ; for though Mr. Dexter was an excellent officer, owing to some hints of her own, and a book she had put into his hands, for he had only got his commission in the Legion since their acquaintance with him ; yet as he had not seen foreign service3

V^UIUIMj*	1/UUIlCl	HUUU.I	IlCltUiaiiJ	UC

of all possible advantage, and----

Before she could finish the sentence, the entrance of the hero of the Bally-nogue Legion put all her schemes to flight: nor could Mr. Dexter’s pleading look, submissive bow, and contrite visage, save him from the lecture which her Ladyship had prepared for his reception whenever he should appear.

Mr. Dexter heard her out uninterruptedly in silence, standing beside her chair, with a countenance in which he endeavoured to mingle an expression of grief and penitence, till she was checked in her career by Mr. Glent-worth’s observing with a smile:

“ Come, Lady Singleton, if you do not intend imposing a fast as well as a penence on Mr. Dexter, 1 think you had better for the present defer the conclusion of this exordium and reproof, and suffer him to get some breakfast.”

Mr. Dexter now took the opportunity of laying his misfortunes to the darkness of the night and the intricacies of the roads, but confessed that his crime, his only crime, was, in the first instance, having neglected to avail himself of her Ladyship’s advice—a crime he had expiated by the most miserable night he had ever passed, for though part of his sufferings were abated by his knowledge of the safety of his friends, conveyed by her Ladyship’s note, yet her displeasure alone was more than he was able to endure, and he had the most horrible nightmare in consequence that had ever disturbed repose.

At this contrite speech, all Lady Singleton’s anger vanished, and Mr. Dexter, having received his pardon at her hand in the form of a cup of tea, resumed his natural pertness ; and having paid his compliments in form to Mr. Glentworth and the ladies, and

a lam j 11CU UUU Ul ICCOglJI WUU LO

Colonel Q’Donnel, he wriggled about the room, threw his eyes from the earthen floor to the old sword, and from the old sword to the old pedigree : he then smiled, and smirked, and took his seat at the table, helped himself to the hoi cake, and recommended it to the ladies, to whom he handed it round; and then replied to Lady Florence's inquiries for her two friends, whom he assured her Ladyship had got safe into the town, about an hour after himself, and whom he left in bed sleeping away their fatigue ; while he had risen before day-light, had been the means of sending off the workmen at 80 early an hour, and had only waited till the lazy Irish hostess was up to give orders for their reception ; as not exactly knowing the state of the carriage, he was uncertain how long they might remain at the inn.

About an hour after breakfast, notice

YOU .IL	,Et

being given that the carriage was ready, and the horses harnessed, the party set out, accompanied by the host, and walked to the opening on the mountain ravine. After a few paces, however, O’Donnel was obliged to return to the house fora tippet, which Lady Florence, whom he escorted, had forgotten, and left behind. As he was proceeding to join the party, he was met by Mr. Gientworth, who, taking his arm, abruptly accosted him.

“ Colonel O’Donnel,” he said, u I am an Englishman: mine is not the country of professions : it is not our way to say more than we mean : it is perhaps our affectation to say even less. When, therefore, Ï make you an offer of service, I trust you will understand me to the letter, that I mean what I say. Interest, at the present moment,

I have none, but---he paused, and

raised his eyes furtively to O’Donnel's face: a deep crimsou burned on the

cheek of his host, and Mr. Glentworth quickly added, “ but should you ever deem it possible that I could in any way be of lise to you, I hope, I trust, you will call on me: under all circumstances I shall expect you will give me an opportunity of discharging some small part of the obligation I owe you, by becoming my guest as soon, and as often, as you can. We propose returning to Ireland in two years; and pray believe me, that we shall not be less interested to do so from the hope of enjoying more readily the pleasure of your society: meantime, however,, we shall hold you in our remembrance, as an expected guest at Glentworth Hall, whenever it may answer your -convenience to afford us your company/’

To this invitation, and to the offer which preceded it, Colonel O’Donnel had only time to make his acknowledgments by a bow, for Lady Single-

TT Q

ton, catching the last words of Mr. Glentworth,, turned round and added: tc I beg leave, Colonel, to join my request to Mr. Glentvvorth’s, that you will give us the pleasure of your company in Derbyshire: as to London, I say nothing, though I should be liappy to meet you any where; but the fact is, for the short three months one is in Town, one is so enframe by the set one lives in, so borne away in a sort of Inrbiliion of engagements and dissipations, that one sees nobody but those one meets every night in the rounds. 1 long, however, to shew you our improvements at Glentworth Hall, all made since mv residence there, and you must try and come over to us in the dead time of the year, when one can afford to be a little rational.” O’Donnel again bowed his thanks; and Mr. Dexter observed

“ If Glentworth Hall be any thing superior to Bailyuogue, it must be o

Paradise of a place, which, indeed, ~eing in England, it cannot fail to he.” u O, I hope you will judge for yourself, as soon as possible, Ir. Dexter,” returned Lady Singleton. “ I trust you will endeavour to make such arrangements that you will be able to follow us about Christmas.”

As Mr. Dexter liked to hear this invitation repeated as often as possible, and had merely made his remark for that purpose, he now bowed and smirked with great satisfaction, and assured her he would sooner give up his paltry situation altogether, than fail in paying his respectful devoirs at Glentworth Hall, in the Christmas holydays ; for his place was no further of value in his eyes than as it gave him something to do. He hated lounging about on any pretence, but if he did forfeit his place to his feelings, yet there might be something as good on the cards for him in store ; and the exer*

tion of a little interest might yet turn up a lucky trump in his favor.’5

As he concluded his speech, his voice lowered ; and the last observation met Lady Singleton’s ear only, who replied :

“ Well, I am sure you have my best wishes at all events.”

They had now reached the extremity of the mountain. The party placed in their carriage, and Mr. Dexter on the favorite mare, which the avant-coureur had rode, they made their acknowledgments and adieus to their host, and drove off; while Me. Rory* bowing and scraping behind his master, took off his shoe, and flung it after the carriage for luck-sake, crying:

“ Well, God speed them, and send them safe, I pray Jasus ; for if 1 never see them again, nor any belonging to them, they shall have my good word, for they are the real sort: long life to them Î Amen.”

Colonel O’Donnell when he had caught the last view of the carriage turning the angle of the mountain, sighed, and returned towards his hut. Of a sanguine and social disposition, prompt to receive favorable prepossessions, and easily won upon by an appearance of confidence and kindness, to part was, with him, under such feelings, always to suffer. The persons with whom he had become so acci-

dentallv associated, and whose recent

%/ f

intrusion had, in the first flush of wounded pride, given him such annoyance, though they were noton his level either in feeli ng or intellect, were yet persons of education and refinement, of elegant habits of life, and of liberal modes of thinking. Such was the society in which he had hitherto lived, and from such he was now utterly secluded. 1 here were many cogent reasons to confine him within the boundary of the rocks which enveloped his retreat.

W	xj\j ni'iüJLu

The few persons at all within his reach were of an inferior description ; and as lie had no mode of returning their ci» yilities (if they had been inclined to offer them), he scrupulously avoided their society. Almost ail the great landholders for twenty miles round were absentees; and to the few who had visited the country, since he had taken up his residence in it, his exist» ence was unknown. Thus condemned bv the elevation of his characters and the poverty of his circumstances, tt) abstain from all neighbourhood and communion, he saw with something of regret the departure of his polished guests. Though in their two first interviews he had endeavored to escape any further intimacy with them, yet during the few hours they had been his guests, they had won upon his partiality. The beauty and pointed attentions of Lady Florence bad awakened certain sensations, not quite strangers

to one who had taken his course in the lists of foreign gallantry. With Mr. GlentwortlTs character he was infatuated ; with Lady Singleton’s he was amused. The Miss Singletons and their governess alone went for nothing,, The slight mortification which the latter had given to his vanitv had died

O	v

away, and no succeeding brusquerie had tended to revive it; for they had held no further intercourse than what the morning's salutations had included.

Though O’Donnel had as much confidence in Mr. Glentworth’s sincerity of profession, as so short an acquaintance could warrant, he yet felt that he never could have an opportunity of putting it to the test. He had himself confessed that he had no interest; his kindness, therefore, could only exhibit itself through a medium, at which he thought Mr. Glentworth had himself glanced — pecuniary benefaction; and from that proof of his friendship the

is 6

spirit and feelings of the gentleman alike revolted. The delicacy, however, of the offer, and the kindness which dictated it, were appreciated and felt; and O’Donners heart told him, that in parting with his acquaintance he was losing a friend. Influenced by these emotions of regret, and although he thought his acquaintance with the English tourists had ended among the mountains of his own solitary retreat, he was by no means prepared to learn with indifference an event, with which he accidentally became acquainted, about six weeks after their departure.

One morning, as he was arranging some family papers, Me. Rory, whom he had sent to the post-house to inquire for some expected foreign letters, entered the room, holding a torn newspaper in his hand. He exclaimed, in a whining voice :

Here is a pretty bit of news I have for your Honor. — Jasus preserve

iis all, evermore, I pray Christ ! Amen. To think of the cratur that stood here in this same room,, brave and hearty,-little more nor a month ago, being dead and buried; and far from his place,— the sowl!—And an undoubted gentleman he was, any way. And is’nt it the best always goes first ? Sure it is : and HI engage it’s long till that spal-peen, that wanted to do me out of my demotion, would be after taking himself off. Well, pace be to him any how : and troth, and i VI buy a mass for the rest of his sowl with all the veins, so I would, only that he would have no faith in it himself, which is remarkable; only nobody’s affair but his own : and any way he shall have my prayers, for I am entirely obliged to him for, his extraordinary kindness in regard of the two golden guineas he gave me, going away, long life to him! and troth, and if it was the last farthing 1 had, Pll change one of them to drink a glass to

his memory, this blessed night, before I close my eyes, so I will.”

Colonel O’Donnel had frequently asked, 4rWhat is the matter, Me. Rory? Who is dead?'* during this funeral oration, which was pronounced with great feeling and emphasis: for though the lower Irish are strangely careless of life, yet death is always to them a subject of lamentation and moralizing, even when they are indifferent to the party deceased.

Before Me. Rory had got to the peroration of his mourning eulogium, his master had taken the newspaper from his hand: it was the fragment of an Edinburgh paper, nearly a month old, and in the obituary column, Colonel O’Donnel read as follows:

“ At Berwick upon Tweed, died of a three days fever, Charles Frederick Glentworih, Esq. of Glentworth Hall, Derbyshire; twenty years member for in successive parliaments, Mr.

Gientworth’s death was the result of a severe and neglected cold, caught on his unprosperous voyage across the Channel, on his way from Donaghadee to Port-Patrick. Mr. Glentworth was returning from visiting his Irish estates, accompanied by his family, and some persons of distinction, who had joined his travelling party. He is succeeded in his large estates by his only son,Charles Glentworth, Esq. of Christchurch, Oxford.”

This melancholy and unexpected intelligence gave a natural shock to the feelings of Colonel O’Donnel : besides a personal regret for the death of this excellent and enlightened Englishman, he felt as an honest man feels for the loss of an honest man, in a world where it is so difficult to fill up the place he has vacated.

CHAPTER 12

■ ■ ■■

Two years sound but as a brief term of time, as a point in the interminable scale of eternity ; and, even in the short period of human life, are considered as trifling in anticipation, and as nothing in regret; yet, in that “ petty space,5' what events may there not be crowded to frustrate the calculation of human probabilities !—what changes may there not be produced in the condition of an individual, of an empire! There is nothing, perhaps, which reduces the importance of the whole system of existing things so low in the estimation of the philosopher, as this rapidity of succession, which dissolves the most important combinations of society, and gives to the circumstances of life the fugitiveness of a dream.

Two years had soon elapsed from the time at which the English tourists bade hire well to their solitary host on the wild shores of Lough Swilly; yet, swift as its flight had been, it had been productive of unlooked-for change to all. To him alone, whom they had

left behind in solitude and obscurity,

*/ 7

time had brought, in its course, no alteration with him ; it had moved on in the slow and tiresome succession of undeviating uniformity, and unmarked but by artificial notices; for, .in him, no consciousness of existence arose from the testimony of new and successive sensations. All was blank, and season followed season in a cheerless series, undistinguished by action, unvaried by event, and unblessed by reciprocated feelings or social enjoyments. The vigorous passions, the inherent energy of O’Donnel, struggled hard against the obvious torpor of his destiny: his spirit, though overborne, was

not subdued; it brooded in silence over the hopelessness of a life which offered its possessor no portion but obscurity and neglect. But, though days and weeks of hstlessness may be endured, yet, when year follows year, and in its flight brings no hope, no promise of alteration, the mind must lose its elasticity, and assume a tone proportioned to the trifling call which is made on it for exertion. By degrees, therefore, O Donnel remitted from his accustomed amusements, and sullenly rejected those resources, which in the first period of suffering had cheated the heart of its anguish, and spared the intellect the horror of contemplating its own ruin. He now ceased to find distraction or relief in the researches of science, gave up his wanderings and his books, and suffered the principle of life to prey upon itself. He had no longer a motive to excite volition* nor impulse to rouse to ac-

Uon. Had there been difficulties to vanquish, he had wrestled with their force; the contest would have sharpened his skill, and strengthened his nerve ; but he had only to submit, poverty closed against him every road to occupation and subsistence, such as a gentleman and a soldier could pursue ; nor did any method present itself by which he might hope to be restored to the walks of enlightened and refined society, in all probability, a few more years of inactivity and neglect would have bowed his nigh spirit to a melancholy acquiescence with his fate, had he not been roused from his increasing lethargy by an effort of petty and local oppression, and by a sentiment of generous and compassionate feeling.

in almost all the villages and little towns of Ireland may be found a sort of little plebeian oligarchy, composed of beings whose sole distinction con-

sists in belonging accidentally to what. Edmund Burke has happily called,* “ The Master Cast;" who feel and assert a sort of constitutional superiority over the less fortunate of their immediate neighbourhood. At the head of 'such a ruling faction, in the village nearest to Colonel O’Donnel’s retreat, stood a Mr. Brian Costello, Attorney-at-Law ; a man who had raised himself from the lowest class of society by arts which enable such men to at* tain to a state of comparative affluence, and who finally became agent of the gentleman in whose kitchen he had often plied as a menial. Mr. Costello had, upon speculation, purchased a large tract of mountain, and obtained a considerable portion of commonage attached to it; lie had also become-master of some small but fertile farms,

* Sec Letter to Sir II. Languish, by the Right Honorable Edmund Burke.

of which he had obtained perpetual leases of his own employer, and which, as is common in Ireland, he again let out at premiums to tenants-at-will : among these tenants was the late Abbé O’Donnel. The little sum of ready money of which he was master on lira arrival in Ireland, he had expended in purchasing the romantic site of his cottage and small garden, and he took of Mr. Costello a little farm in the. neighbourhood, from which he derived the whole means of his subsistence.

As the Abbé led the life of a her* mit, and was too much a'cynic to inT terest himself'in the concerns of others, lie had lived in his retreat more feared than known, and was suffered to remain unmolested. By some he was deemed a saint, by others a wizzard, and by many as little better than a maniac. The high-spirited and impetuous boy, whom he had made the companion of his solitude, felt |ji§ su~<

periority which nature, birth, and education, had given him over the little great of his neighbourhood ; and as his youth and activity carried him in more frequent contact with the vicinage,, he took little care to disguise his opinion of himself and them ; but to the natives of the soil, the poor Irish servitors, he was condescending and gentle; for he considered them as the descendants of the brave peasantry who had so often fought the battles of his ancestors: without losing sight of his own dignity, he mingled in their sports, and carried off many a prize of superiority in their athletic exercises.

The impressions which he left behind him, when, yet a boy, he quitted the country to enter into a foreign service, were revived when he returned in manhood ; and, though his paternal lands were situated in another part of the country, the name of O’Donnel was still loved and revered.

Since his return, he had more than once been the advocate of the unfortunate, and the champion of the oppressed ; and, though a tencint-at-will for the spot which afforded him his sole' means of subsistence, to Mr. Brien Costello, he had, in a feeling of indignation for violated justice, opposed his power in an instance which too often occurs, and too often is past over in Ireland unnoticed and unstigmatized. Costello had let some of his mountain land to cotters, at a rent far beyond its value ; and, to reconcile them to a bargain, closed under the pressure of necessity, he had allowed them a cer« tain portion of commonage : to the cultivation of these wild spots, the cotter had given the overplus of his time and labor ; but, when it began to wear the air of cultivation, to repay his industry, and assist him in paying off a part of his exorbitant rent, the sordid landlord, contrary to all equity,

and to his compact, inclosed the ground, and deprived his tenant of the only means which could make his bargain tolerable. An instance of this kind had occurred in the case of a poor man, to whose door it brought ruin.

After the manner of the lower Irish, when they appeal for relief in their necessities, he had thrown himself on his knees at O’Donnel’s feet to supplicate his interference with his landlord : that he was the brother-in-law of his own foster-brother, Me. Rory, was not his faintest claim* to the ser-

* To causes such as these, Mr. Young, the learned and ini partial English traveller, in his Irish Tour, Vol. 2, attributes all the tumults which so long disturbed the interior of Ireland, and was committed by the cotters and lowest classes of the people, under the name of c€ White Boys:” they were chiefly Roman Catholics: but the insurgenta who appeared in Ulster, under the names of 66 Steel Bogs,” u Oak Boys,”

Peep of Bay Boys,” were the manufacturing

vice he demanded. O’Donnel, much against his inclination, condescended to intercede with Mr. Costello, to argue, to entreat, but failed in every attempt : he then informed this equitable landlord, in language no way equivocal, of his opinion of the whole transaction; and it required no very acute powers of induction on the part of Mr. Costello to draw from the per-viation of O’Donnel’s speech, that he believed him to be a rascal ; so satisfactorily to his own mind had he, indeed, concluded upon this point of the Colonel’s creed, that he wanted only the courage to calf him out: he did, however, what he thought safer, and

Protestants and Dissenters of the north, and their insurrection arose exclusively from some Tariations in the manufacture, &c. but they •were all confounded in one; and the causes so (( instigated, were neither enquired into nor' Jsjiown.”—See Young's Tour.

quite as mucn to the purpose — he gave him clue notice to quit his farm, unless he chose to continue a tenant at a rent somewhat more than double the possible product of the land: the result was, that O’Donnel was ejected, and left destitute of all means of subsistence beyond the produce of a scanty garden.—There was, indeed, other ground within his option to take at a lower price ; but it had much to create, much to reclaim ; and O’Donnel, full of spirited activity in other fields, was no agriculturist, either in practice or speculation : his sword lay idle in its scabbards and yet he knew not how to “ turn it into a plough-share from his early habits of life, he knew nothing of the less dignified, less refined, modes of existence, so necessary in the' common order of things, but so little attainable by those whose lives have been a series of brilliant emotion, or whose characters can only be in-

fiuenced by strong and powerful excitements. With Want thus knocking at his door, Charity still found an altar beneath his roof : the day after Mr. Costello had turned him out of his farm, an aged female presented herself to his notice, claiming his assistance, as her nearest surviving relation : of lier person he had no recollection, though he had seen eyes that resembled the still bright and keen orbs, which, unextinguished bv time, vet sparkled in the stranger’s head; but, when she mentioned her name, and . alluded to her story, he acknowledged

without hesitation the only sister of

*

his deceased kinsman.

It is not long since, a mesalliance, in an ancient Milesian family was deemed no less degrading by the good gentry of Ireland, than by the highest aristocratic races of the French nobility: they claimed the few distinctions left them with religious pertinacity.

VOL. IT.	F

Honor O’Donnell once the bean tv of

*

her time and country, had made an unfortunate match, and had been thrown for ever from the bosom of her family: after a long life of suffering and misfortune, reduced to the last extremity of want, of misery, and of age, she sought relief from the only one of her kindred who had not yet rejected and disowned her: the last appeal she had made to family compassion, was thejfirst which had not been refused. O’Donnel considered her rights to the little possessions of her late brother, as, at least, equal to his own ; and her age and indigence as still more importunate than his own misfortunes: he resigned, therefore, to her, for her life, the cottage and the garden, which was all he could claim as his ; the one afforded her the first home of which she had been mistress of since (forty years before) she had fled clandestinely from the house of her youth;

the other was sufficient to supply her few wants ; and the vigorous old woman who had served her brother was a fit attendant for her years and infirmities.

For himself there now remained but one step to take, but one effort to make, and that was once more to seek a foreign service : this was a step ab horrent to his feelings ; for he fondly hoped, that having once served his own king and country, he would never have been driven to serve another; but it was a step he reconciled to his principles and loyalty ; for he resolved to perish witli want, rather than raise an arm against the banner of an empire of which he was a natural subject, and in whose cause he had before been proud to spill his best blood.

Austria was then in alliance with England, and both were opposed to France : his nearest kinsman and friend was a general in the Austrian service,

?r 9

and to him he wrote, in the certainty of receiving a commission in his own regiment, desiring him to direct his answer to the General Post-office, London, when he hoped to be able to meet it. Such, indeed, was his intention : to remain where he was, was impossible; and even if there was a chance of failing in his application to General O’Donnel, which scarcely could be, since he had pressed him to accept a commission a few years before, he resolved once more to make an effort for obtaining even an ensigney in the British service ; and if all failed, to go out as a volunteer, and subsist on the pay of a private.

But the obstacle which impeded even these moderate speculations, was want of money, even to bear the ex-pences of his journey. He had distant relations of his own name, both in the south and in the west of Ireland, who, though the original splendor of

their family greatness was “ something obscured,5* still enjoyed rank, opulence, and high consideration ; but he shrunk from claiming the privileges of poor relationship, and from every branch of the O’Donnel family, still remaining in Ireland, he had carefully concealed his situation and circumstances. His books left him bv his uncle were valuable, but few ; and he had obtained a due price for them from a bookseller at Belfast, to whom he had sent the catalogue ; but the sum he obtained did not make up the third part of that which was requisite to defray the expences of his journey to the continent ; even .without servant, with which he would be obliged to dispense, though that servant was the faithfi; and warm-hearted Me. Rory. He had, besides his books, but two articles in the world which he could turn into money; and when they suggested them, selves to his mind, the blood rushed

from his heart to his face, and again returned to its source with an icy coldness : these articles were the sword, which still hung suspended over the chimney-piece, and a small diamond ring. He was alone in the parlor of the cottage, which he now no longer considered his, when the necessity of patting with these, to him, holy relics, suggested itself. The rmg was suspended round his neck by a ribbon — he drew it forth and gazed on it: a train of intimate associations arose in quick succession as he read the date engraven on its “ golden round for the ring was all that remained to him of the earlier and most brilliant period of his existence, when full of hope and joy, his light and gallant spirit had received no impression from time, but such as love and glory gave, when new to life, and flushed with passion, he •feared no change, and suspected no illusion—when alternately hound in the

silken cords of pleasure, or braced with the rude harness of war, he sprung from the couch of voluptuousness,^to rush into the field of combat, and to carry with him, even into scenes of warfare, that buoyancy of spirit, which once distinguished the gallant leaders of the Gallic armies, and which lent to the rudeness of the camp the gaiety and grace of the drawing-room.

He had won that little ring at a court lottery at Versailles, when the loveliest sovereign that ever received the affections of a devoted and loyal peoples distributed the prizes: from the hands of Maria Antoinette he had received the ring the night before he accompanied his regiment to the fields 0f # * * * The ring was his talisman—he confided in its influence ,as the pledge of his success ; and the distinction he obtained in that year’s campaign, procured him shortly after the military rank which

y 4

rendered him the youngest colonel in the French service.

The value of this irinket was inconsiderable; but it was the bequest of a beautiful woman, and an unfortunate queen ; and there was still enough of the spirit of a Milesian cavalier in his breast to estimate the gem by the standard of sentiment, and not by the cold calculation of a lapidary. Pie kissed and replaced ft—arose from the table at which he sat—walked towards the chimney-piece, and fixed his eyes on the sword of the hero whose memory he revered, of whose kindred he was so proud, of whose character he was enamoured.

With that sword the chief of O’Donne! had avenged his own wrongs, arid

redressed those of his country. O’Don-

•>

nel took down the sacred weapon—sacred at least in his estimation, and examined it with the scrutiny of one who

beheld it for the first time, but it was, in tact, with the emotion of one who feared he was looking on it for the last.

'[ he basket of the weapon was of pure Irish gold, such as is frequently found in various forms in the bogs of Ireland ;* and he supposed from the price obtained by his uncle fora golden corslet, that , its value could not be under one hundred pounds; this Was a considerable sum to a man who had scarcely a guinea, and he resolved on the sacrifice of a relic dear alike to his pride and his affections ; yet as he drew the blade from its scabbard, he stooped his head so

The handles of swords of the ancient Irish were frequently incrusted with gold, according to O’Halloran, 1744. Some gold-handled swords and golden gorgets were found in the bog of Cullen, in Tipperary, which is since called by the country-people, 44 the Golden Bog.” Several golden corslets were also found in Kerry, jSec O'Bailor an^ and Smith's Kerry,.

T? A

close to it, that it touched his lips, and a tear dropped upon its rusted steel. He hastily pushed it back into its sheath, and with an unsteady hand, was endeavouring to replace it in its old station, when Me. Rory entered the room. His arms were laden with books which he was about to pack up to send by a carrier to Belfast. He threw them beside a box that was to contain them, and kneeling down to pack them, he turned up his eyes, and perceived O’Donnel replacing the sword.

u Will I give the hilt of that a rub, j'our Honor,” he said, “ with the thammy, for it’s mighty dusty

O’Donnel made no reply, but stood with his arms folded, and his eyes fixed, lost in thought.

I wonder your Honor,^ continued Me. Rory, going on with his employment, “ 1 wonder if it be’s true, what I hear tell from one of the followers of

the O Connors, when I was keeping my station at Lough Dergh, this time two years, that the great O’Connor, Don of Cloonalis, sôuld the fine ancient ould golden crown of the family, which the King's of Ireland, his own kin, long life to them ! used to wear iu the ould times, Sir.* The cratur! — well, it was hard run with him before he did that same, anyhow, I’ll be bound» And well it might, in troth, in regard ofhis extraordinary hospitalities. Devil a one ever left the gate of an O’Connor

* This affecting circumstance, which occurred a few years ago, is so generally known, in Ireland at least, as to need no comment. Two golden crowns were found in the Bog of Cullen : the first, of chased work, and without across, was purchased by the Cumerford family : the second was bought by Mr. Kinshanlloe, a jeweller iu Limerick ; it weighed six ounces, and when melted, had very little alloy.—See Harrises Works, Vol. 2. and O'Ilalloran's History of Antiquities of Ireland.

yet dry or fasting, and sign’s* on them, God bless them:	in	respect	of sell-

ing the fine ancient ould crown, the sowls !”

44 I am certainly not mined by my hospitality, Me. Rory,” said O’Donnel, starting from his reverie, and affecting a tone of cheerful firmness; 44 and yet I must part with something I value quite as much as my kinsman O'Connor did his crown.”

44 IIow is that, your Honor ?” asked Me. Rory, raising his head.

44 The fact is, Me. Rory,5' returned O’Donne!, in a hurried voice, 44 I cannot go on here any longer, for many reasons. I mean to pass over immedi-atelv to the continent, and to enter the Austrian service. Î shall have rio means to defray the ex pen res of my journey, but by raising money on this

* Sign’s on them : tho sign or symptom of ijt is apparent on them.

sword, and I wish you to take it with you to-morrow to L. Derry, and to dispose of it.”

Is it the sword, Colonel ?

^ Yes, yes,” returned O’Donnel, with humour, and annoyed by the expression of Me. Rory’s countenance,

“ O, very well, Sir ; surely I will, that is, I’d rather nat, if your Honor plases, for a raison I have—quit the place! to be sure, your Honor, why would’nt we quit; what use is there staying, when we hav’nt as much ground we can call our own, as we could lay the track of our foot in. In regard of that dirty spalpeen, Tôrney Costello, bad luck to him ; it’s little the likes of his mother’s son, ever thought he’d see the day that he’d turn one of the great O’Donnefs out of their own real and undoubted lands, and within view of their own rock,*

The rock of Inauguration

as Ï may say, barring the mountains of Kilmacrennan, that's between us and it; but he’s corne of a bad breed, any how ; the scum of the earth—but as to parting with the sword, your Honor, it's what i’ll never consint to., while I breathe the breath of life : for what would you part with her, Sir? Is it the great O’Donnel Bal-deargae's sword you’d be after selling in the face of the whole country: would’nt it be a burning shame, that they should have it to say; and what would the family in County Leitrim say to it,* and the family of New Port, and the family in County Waterford? and what would yourself say, Colonel, if ye heard of the gold rings being souid that were found on your greatancestor’s fingers,-j* near Ballyshanny, that your third **

** Where (he different brandies of the O’Dotu nel family have their seats.

i See note at the end of the volume*

cousin, once removed, wears to this day in Spain, that’s if he is in it; or if you heard of your own cousin-german in France, selling the blessed and holy Cathach which was bequeathed to the family by the greatest of saints, Co-lumb-kill.,,#

44 It is no matter, Mc. Roit,” said O’Donnel in a decided tone, 44 what any one thinks ; the sword I must and will part with; nor is that the most difficult effort I shall have to make, for I must part with what I prize still more than the sword/’

O’Donnel sighed deeply.

44 And what’s that, }Tour Honor ?” asked Me. Florv, in a subdued voice, sighing in his turn, and putting in and taking out the books, as if thoughtless of his occupation. “ Is it Bran, the baste, in respect of the trifle of mis- *

* See note at the end of the volume.

chief he docs betimes among' the neighbours’ cattle ? Sure, if they’d let the hound alone, he would never d.r to trouble them ; but they worn' the life out of him, fairly, so they do; that's the gassoons, Sir.”

“ No,” returned O’Donnel, will) a forced smile ; ££ 1 don’t mean to sell Bran, but I fear I must part with one quite as faithful, and much more valued.”

O’Donnel paused for a moment, and then with an effort at firmness, yet with a tremulous motion of the under lip, he added :

£i in a word, 1 must part with you, Me. Itory.”

The books dropped from Me. llory’s hold, and still remaining on his knees, he clasped his hands, and with a'look of grief, almost amounting to despair, but in a tone at once supplicatmg -And determined, he replied :

ct Oh ! no. Colonel—Sir, ifyou plase>

you will nat—part with me ! For what, Sir? for why would you part with me? Sure if 1 have offended you, Colonel, dear, 1 ax your pardon now, on my two bended knees—take my life, Sir— is’nt it vour own ? Who saved it for me in the wars, when I fought cheek by jowl with you. Sir?—only yourself, Colonel : troth you did, and for why would you part with me, Phaidrig Me. Rory, if it was only in regard of being your own foster-brother, who took the same-mother’s milk with you, and who was a hurler* with you, when we were gassoons together, playing among the mountains? And would’nt 1 have followed you to foreign parts, when we were grown up fine slips of lads, only

* The lui rling matches were frequently played, even within a few years back, by the youth of two counties opposed to each other, and frequently led on by young men of birth and fortunes.	ç

the mother that bore me left her dying curse on me., if I deserted my fine ancient ould father, until God bad taken him; which he did'nt till five years ago, come Lamas ; and for all that, did’nt I go into foreign parts to see you, Sir, and brought you the present of the finest mare that ever was strode, following you through the world wide, into Germany, without knowing a word of any foreign language, good or bad, but my own, and I never came a crass you till I saw you go to mass in your elegant regimentals, with the King and Queen, and ail the Royal Family,* long life to them ; and when you came back here after the troubles, Colonel, did’nt I list with you in the brigade, and follow you to the wars, Sir? and from that blessed moment to this, hav’nt I been your true and faithful

* Sec note at the end of the volume.

servant; and why should’nt I, Colonel? what abler boy in the Barony could you get to serve you? ante I your Honor’s own age, thirty-four last Holy-eve, and your own Honor’s height, six feet? and if i'don’t answer you, Sir, shew me the kd that will. Colonel, to say nothing of fosterage.”

During this appeal, in which one association had arisen repidîy Güi of another in the mind of the affectionate and devoted Me. Rory, his master vainly endeavoured to interrupt him, to raise him from his supplicant posture, and .before he had concluded, which he did with tears in his eyes, as vainly endeavored to recover back his own firmness, the looks, even more than the words, of Me. Rory, had put wholly to flight.

“ No, your Honor,” said Me. PiOry, when Colonel O’Donnel stretched out his hand to raise him, “ I have made a

vow to my so If, neve r* to rise off my bended knees, wnich is as good as being

O	o

boch'-sh'orn, until it's what your Honor recalls your words, and says, “ Plan-driu' Me. Rory, I'll never part kith you, as long as you can be of the lastc use in life to me, Phaidrig and for why should you, Colonel ?”

“ Because, Me. Rory,” returned his master, with a mixture of kindness and irritation in his voice and manner, “ because 1 can no longer either repay your services, or maintain you ; for I am a man of desperate fortunes. 1 am about to seel*; means of supporting life in a foreign land, by my sword ; nor can I think of rewarding your generous attachment so ill as to take advantage of your disinterestedness, and involve you in my uncertain destiny, my cei>

* À very old Irish custom.

tain difficulties. But should any thing like independence ever again be mine, my friend, believe that you shall share it, aye, to the last farthing, Me. Rory!”

“ Shall I, Sir?” said Me. Rory, starting on his feet with a look of wildness ; and then pausing for a moment, he ran out of the room : returning, however, almost immediately, and emptying the contents of an old worsted stocking on the table, he cried :

“■ There are four of the ten gold pieces your Honor gave me for a keepsake, when I brought you the mare to foreign parts.

u There is the Jive pound note the fine

ancient ould Abbe left me bv will, and

%> *

there is the silver-gilt watch which ould Thady Dogherty, my father’s ould cro-ney, left me with his dying breath ; and you know right well, Sir, that when I offered you this same to help to pay

the fine for the farmf to that thief of a Costello, you would hit inti rely oblige me by taking it ; and now you see, it will maintain and keep me, till we land in foreign parts, and when your Honor will be a great General, and myself a Corplar, I’ll be bound, for your sake. Sir ; so you see, Colonel, HI be no trouble in life to you, and never ax you for bit or sup, only your old coats ; anil now, Sir, there is no delay in the world, only to pack up the portmantle, and quit the place, which is to the fore for your Honor, whenever God takes the fine ancient ouid gentlewoman, your grand-aunt, Mrs. Honor Kelly, to himself.”

As the attachment and resolution of Me. Kory were now equally and evi- *

* A similar fact of an Irish okl servant \\ài related to me a few years back, by the lit. lion. Lady E. B—rj

dently firm and unvanquishable, and as his master was well assured that he would follow him at all risks, if he was not permitted to accompany him, Colonel O’Donnel, unconsciously pleased to shelter his own inclinations under his servant’s, replied

“Well, Me. Rory, be it so, if you » are willing for mv sake, to encounter hardships without the hope of recompense: if you are satisfied to take the wages of kindness and confidence instead of-----He paused in some

emotion, and unable to proceed, he smiled benevolently, and held out his hand to his now happy servant; but Me. Rory, bowing down to the ground, retreated respectfully, deeming himself unworth}7 the high honor tendered to him, and with a cry, that something resembled the funeral iillcilation of his own country, he rushed out of the room.

Within the space of a few clays, O’Dounel received the money for the books he had sent to Belfast ; perfected a deed, by which he put his kinswoman in possession of the cottage during her life, and had a case placed over the picture of the Abbé O’Dounel, which he commended to her care ; and when he had also made the few arrangements necessary for his journey to Dublin, where he meant to dispose of the basket of his sword, to a liberal purchaser of such articles, and from whence he meant to sail for England.

On the evening previous to his departure, as he was wandering thoughtfully at sun-set along a ridge of rocks which hung above the ravine which led to his cottage, he perceived a man on horseback riding beneath, and stopping at the cottage-door, lie saw Me. llory receive a paper from his hand, and point to Vimself : the man tinevv his eyes upon the heights where he

atood, and suddenly gallopped away. Before O’Donnel had reached the glen by the most rapid descent, the echo of the horses’ feet had died into silence. Me. Rory advanced towards him with a letter, or rather a-small packet.

Here is a letter for your Honor/* said Me. Rory; “ God send it may bring good news: I touId the young man that brought it that he’d have his answer in a minute, if he’d step in and take an air of the fire, and give his baste a breathing time; for troth th* animal smoked like the kitchen chim-ney.”

While Me. Rory was speaking, his master was employed in breaking open cover after cover: one blank envelope succeeded another ; and he began to think that all was a blank, and that the whole was some stupid practical joke, when he at last came to the letter thus carefully inclosed, and found within its folds two English bank bills

VOii. II*	o

of a thousand pounds each : the letter only contained twolines, which alluded to the inclosure: they ran as follows—

“ Use it freely, for it is your own ;

Use it discretely, for it is a woman’s gift.’*

Me. Rory stood watching the rapid changes in his master’s countenance as he cast his eyes from the bills to the letter, from the letter to the bills, and alternately examined the seal and the direction: the former was simply the impression of a dial plate, the motto,

£; CIIETO FUOR-COMMOTO DENTIIO.”

On the letter there was no post-mark— no post-town ; it was simply subscribed to Lieutenant-Colonel O’Donne].

“ I am afraid no good comes of that letter, your Honor,” said Me. Rory, anxiously.

<c Would it be possible to overtake the messenger ?”

** O ! it would, Sir,” said Me. Rory eagerly; “ that is, your Honor, it would nat; but morally impossible in respect of his being at th* other side of the mountain by this—Jack o’the lan-thorn was nothing to the lad in regard of his being mighty quick.

“ Are you Colonel O’Donnel’s servant ?’ says he,

“ I am, Sir/ says I, c in lieu of a better/

“ Is he at home ?’ says he,

“Yes he is,' says I, c as you may see;’ and I pointed to your Honor on them rocks, with the sun setting like a glory on you i with that he says no more, but gives me the letter, and claps spurs and away with him, though I kept calling to him to come back for the answer; but sure HI go to the village and inquire for him, your Honor, for he must bait there any how, Sir.”

“ Pray do then, Me. Rory/' said g 9

O’Donnel, with his eyes fixed on the letter.

“ O, I will, your Honor; I’ll be there in a whiff\ though I would’nt know the fellow’s face again in respect of never seeing it, for his hat was flapped so in his eyes, Sir, and his surtout was wrapped round him:	but I’ll go,

your Honor, and look for him.”

Still he lingered with an expression of countenance that O’Donnel happily construed, and he observed : —

“You may set your heart at rest, Me. Rory: there is no bad news: this letter is from a friend; but 1 wish much to return an answer, so much, that 1 ' will walk to the village myself, and inquire for the messenger.” And he proceeded on with a rapid step.

“ Well, God be praised, Sir; for I had mighty ugly dreams last night ; and thought I saw the ancient ould Abbe, sitting on the Rock of Kilma-

erennan, bidding us s;ood bye, which

J	o	o	%>	*

is as much as to sav we shall never

%/

tread this ground again any way, and Mary says the bracket hin never roosted the whole night long, only flitting about; well, she’s a wonderful bird.3* During these observations,Me.Rory was walking after his master, and having opened the littlegateforhim at the end of the glen,he took out his beads and prayed his way back, observing at every decade, 44 Well, that letter must mean something good or bad, any how, to say nothing of the dream, which was remarkable.33

Colonel O’Donnel returned late ta the cottage, and much heated by the rapidity with which he had walked ; but all inquiry was fruitless: no person to answer the description of the messenger had been seen in the village, or had stopt to refresh himself or his horse at the public-house.

He remained, therefore, lost in amazement at an event so extraordinary, so

* 7

G 3

unexpected, so mysterious : the number of envelopes he had had to undo were intended probably to give the messenger time to escape, for there could be no other clue to discovery.—Who then was this invisible and guardian angel who thus secretly and unostentatiously administered to his wants. It was evidently a woman, as it was asserted to be; it was a woman’s hand, a woman’s pretty seal and device, and the act, at once delicate in its conduct as prodigal in its nature, was a woman’s ; but what woman ? His thoughts suddenly reverted to the English tourists. They wandered for a moment to Lady Singleton : nothing could be less like her than the mystery with which so liberal a benefaction was conferred: they fixed on Lady Florence. She was nobly born—might be noble-minded, and perhaps imprudently generous. Two years were a long space to elapse without testifying this liberal

interest in his favor, which now fell like a thunder-bolt on him ; but if it was not her, it was utterly impossible to fix on any other. Her eye-and her smile still lived in his memory, for since he had beheld her, no eye so bright, no smile so bland, had met his view to efface their influence. Every man is vain where woman is in question, and though CFDonnel was as little so as most men, yet the play of Lady Florence’s vanity had been so successfully directed against his own, that even at this remote period it influenced his conjectures, and he remained almost convinced that she was his invisible benefactress. The person entrusted with the commission was well acquainted with the intricacies of the mountain roaas, and the scite of his retreat; and the Admiral’s domestics knew the country well.

He sealed up the bills, and placed them in a letter-case, till on his arrival

g 4

in London he should have an opportunity of returning them to the prodigal donor, resolved that no want, no misfortune should ever induce him to touch a shilling of a beamiest, which, coming as it did, he would have deemed it nothing short of infamy to touch. Few women were so situated as to be able to make such donations, even when the object sanctioned the liberality. A married woman could scarcely do it without the knowledge of her husband, or with his permission ; but from any woman, under any circumstances, he would have shrunk from receiving pecuniary assistance : the very idea wounded the finest feelings of his nature, humbled his pride, and revolted his principle. With respect to his worldly circumstances, this princely gift, therefore, went for nothing, but it interested and perplexed him, and kept his spirits buoyant, which would else have sunk, as he again saw himself

on the point of quitting the shades of his youth, and thrown destitute on the world, with a mode of existence to seek at four-and-thirty. Where now were the hopes that misled,, the illusions that dazzled, the motives that im- * pelled, and the fresh unworn imagination that threw its brilliant halo over all ? Time and experience had damped or dispelled them, and he was now undeceived without being insensible; he felt not less deeply but less promptly, and expected nothing; for he had been disappointed in every thing.

The poor and the peasantry of his neighbourhood, who heard of his intended departure, crowded the avenue of his dwelling on the morning of his journey, and followed the chaise that carried him to the town where he was to take the mail. While Me. Rory, who would not be prevailed to go inside, sat on the portmanteau behind, shaking hands with some, waving hig

« 6

hat to others,, bidding farewell, and giving a tear or a prayer to all ; while Bran, with his old collar newly furbished up for the occasion by his friend Me. Rory, followed the carriage., and shared the adieus and good wishes of the affectionate crowd.

CHAPTER 13

In Dublin, Colonel O’Donnel received the full value for the basket of his sword, and carefully preserved the blade till better times might enable him to remount it: and the day after his arrival in the capital of his country, he sailed for Holyhead, in the Dublin Packet, in the hope of making acquaintance with its popular commander, of whose urbanity and attentions Mr. Glentworth and his party had spoken much and gratefully.*

Pursuing their route to London by the mail, the Irish travellers reached the metropolis of England in less than

* It is unnecessary to mention Captain'S——^r.

IVVU uujo , auu	iiv.j	..«...-w,	--

vered a countryman in one of the %/

waiters, at the house where the coach stopt, procured through his recommendation lodgings more adequate to the pecuniary resources of his master than to his spirit or rank. But Me. Rory, who loved change, and loved travelling, and who was in high spirits, declared Iheplace was nate an clane, but: the floor mighty slippery, though no ways damp, but quite the contrary, which was remarkable.

The morning after his arrival, Q’Donnel’s first intention was to seek out the residence of Lady Florence Grandville. He had no interest in renewing his acquaintance with any other of his quondam guests ; for with the exception of him who was no more, he considered them as mere people of the world, disciples of that doctrine whose wisdom is to make the most of the present. In the memory

of such he well knew absentees have no place : the few who contribute to their immediate amusement, or supply their actual want,make up to them the whole sum of society ; and even those few, adopted rather than chosen, tolerated oftener rather than preferred, occupy attention but for the existing moment, and then, as chance or interest decides, pass on, like the little circle which preceded them, to make room for others, who in succession amuse, and are forgotten like themselves.—O’Donnel knew enough of life to feel that with such persons a permanent connection was not to be expected ; and that fortune, rank, and consideration, could alone give body to a floating prepossession,or durability to fugitive esteem. Too proud to seek, where he was certain he should not be sought, he confined his researches in the Red Book to the resi- r denceof Commodore Grandville; upon this point, however, he obtained no in-

formation from its pages. The house of his brother, Earl Grandville, he found was in Portman-Square, and thither he directed his steps. As he was proceeding along Bond-Street, he heard his name loudly pronounced, and turning round, perceived a footman running after him, and still calling him by his name. He stopped, till them an, bustling through the crowd, could come up to him and deliver his message, which was, that his lady, Lady Singleton, begged to speak with him.

O’Donnel followed the man, and perceived Lady Singleton’s head stretched out of her carriage window, at a considerable distance. u Colonel O’Donne],” she exclaimed as he approached, “ 1 am quite rejoiced to meet you here. How long have you been in town ? Why did you not call on me ? Do you know I have sent you three letters successively, these three last days, begging you would come

over as quickly as possible.”44 Indeed,” said O’Donnel involuntarily, gratified by the unexpected cordiality of her manner, and astonished at the nature of lier communication ; 44 three letters to me, Madam !” 44 I have a great deal to say to you/’ she continued eagerly. 44 Here, John, open the door. Pray come into my carriage, Colonel, for a few minutes.”

O’Donnel prepared to obey ; but the thing was impossible:	the	vis-a-vis

was so heaped up with books, papers, parchments, patterns, new music and old china, that not only O’Donnel could not get in, but a quantity of the light freighting fell out. 44 What a bore!” said Lady Singleton 44 Take care, John, of that piece of silk ; pick up Davy’s Researches. There is Lady Llanberis’s ferme-ornee entirely spoiled —Oh heavens ! the Dresden cup ! and poor Winter’s M. S. ballet!” *

O’Donnel and the footman had by

degrees reinstated all these valuable and incongruous articles ; and her Ladyship, satisfied of their safety, again addressed the former, with an air of confidence and mystery. “ I must see you,” she sa d. immedi tely, 1 have something to communicate which cannot fail to grat.fy and interest you. There is a person extremely anxious about you, a distinguished person.

“ About me !” interrupted O’Donnel eagerly, hoping that he had come at the clue of his mysterious benefaction. <c Ï can tell you nothing now,” she continued ; “ for here is the shopman with my lace. I am, as usual, accablée with business. But will you dine with me to-day in Baker-Street? No, not to-day. By the bye, we all meet this evening at my brother’s to sign tlie marriage articles. To-morrow then—but to-morrow Horatia is to be married. However you may breakfast with me to-morrow before the fuss

begins: vve don’t go to St. George’s till eleven.”—O’Donnel accepted the invitation, and the next moment, perceiving her Ladyship deep in all the treasures of Mecklin and Valenciennes, he made his bow, and retired from the carriage, resolved to postpone his enquiries after Lady Florence till he heard jnore of the distinguished person who was so deeply interested for him. Aware however of the inconsequence of Lady Singleton’s character, he resolved not to entrust her with a confidence which she had not the delicacy to estimate. It was not his own secret, but that of another which he held in keeping; and Lady Singleton was perhaps the last person in the world to whom such a trust should be confided. He remembered “ the discretion” recommended, and felt no inclination to swerve from the counsel.

The next morning he was punctua] to his appointment, and found her

Ladyship in hcr dressing-room, as he had found her in her carriage, encompassed by all the insignia of the bustling office which she had assigned to herself in the world. Lady Singleton was no longer the personage she had been : she was no longer upheld by the influence of twenty thousand per annum, by the respectability of her late inestimable husband, nor by what in London tells more than all, the size and situation of her house. She had lost her hotel with its court, and porte-cocher, and lived in acomparatively small house in Baker-Street. Her character had also undergone some modification, as well as her state. Her self-importance was diminished. But though in herself she had very limited materials to work upon, her wonted restlessness and inherent tendency to dictation still found vent, and was officiously busied for others. She made good matches^ broke off bad ones ; directed the fêtes

she could no longer give, and made lists for asssembiies she could no longer hold.. Still preserving the bon odeur of her former fashion, she was consulted as counsel, or accepted as umpire, in contests between those rival lollies -which so often wage mutual and unrelenting war among the great. She was the oracle likewise of all those who were not, could not, and yet would be great; and was assiduously cultivated by the nouveaux nobles and the nouveaux riches. She gave the tasteful direction of fashion to the innumerable fopperies in which new-gotten wealth sports away the burthen of its superfluily. There was one person, however, to whom she was at this moment exclusively devoted, whose rank, fashion, and opulence, gave consequence to the connection, and whose character and pursuits afforded ample materials for her 46 strenuous idleness” to act

upon. This person was Adelaide Countess of Llanberis.

u Well, Colonel,’'’said Lady Single-ton, extending her hand to him as he entered ; “ here you find me, as usual, sur le grand trottoir, in the service of my friends. You do not know that I have been your promuse en titre since we parted : i have indeed, and to some purpose, too. I have not forgotten L*ame Paladin, as Lady Florence used to call you.”

Where is Lady Florence ?” eagerly interrupted O’Donnel.

fC Oh, poor Lady Florence ! you have not heard then ? However, you have no loss: she could be of no use to you in London. They had a wretched twopenny house, and lived entirely among their own knot. The Grandvilles are poor as poor can be : Still, however, she was good ton ; but there is an end of her. She had twins

—Only think of Lady Florence having twins! She lost her health alter a bad confinement, and with it her beauty— and you know she had nothing else — she/is ordered to the Madeiras, as her last hope, where the Admiral (for he is now an admiral) is stationed. There they have been these twelve months, and there they are likely to remain, as my daughter Vandaleur tells me, who heard from her friend Ladv Florence last week/*

4r Your daughter Vandaleur !” repeated O’Donnel, endeavouring to recollect the members of the group, of whom few had made any great impression upon his memory.

44 Then you did not hear that my daughter Caroline has married Mr. Vandaleur? You know he could not really follow his friend Lady Florence to the Madeiras; not that he is less devoted. But exclusively of the ne-*

f

cessiiy or ouservmg me decencies, u could not be expected that a man whose habits are made up to London -life would expatriate himself out of sentiment. Au reste, he lived in the same set with my family, and you know men like to marry in their own set; and so cela va sans dire! It is a good match, but not so good as Horatia's, which I call my match; for Mr. Henshaw is one of the most rising young men of the day, and heir to the richest commoner in England. Of course, you read his maiden speech. I have had every thing my own way, from the bridal veil to the jointure. Indeed, I had no one to act for me : for a melancholy change has taken place in my family and circumstances since I saw you, Colonel O’Donnel, which of course you heard.’*

She paused and sighed, and after a silence of some minutes,, which O’Don-

*

nel, absorbed in feelings of unaffected regret, did not interrupt, she again resumed :

“ My step-son is gone to the Greek Islands with Lord Loston, the son off inv most particular friend ; but apropos, of this friend, for we have not a moment to lose. There is, as I mentioned to 37ou, a very distinguished person, very much interested for you indeed : and not to faire valoir my little services, I must confess it was I who first mentioned you to her ; and that, too, in a manner calculated to make the impressions she had received in your favor lasting ; for, Je connois ma femme / She expects you at her villa, to which she has particularly invited you. Her invitation is now on its way to Lough Swilly ; but it shall be repeated immediately, in due form, as I shall write this day to inform her of your arrival in London.

I should not be so anxious to bring about this acquaintance, but that Ï.

know, in the end, you will be both mutually obliged to me. She has a powerful interest, great influence; and whatever may be your views (for I suppose you have done nothing yet), she cannot fail to forward them, if her prevention in your favor continues ; and this will depend on yourself. Your talents and accomplishments are just the sort of thing to catch her : indeed, from my description of you, and all that sort of thing, she is already quite eprise, on ne le peut plus. I promised her, when 1 thought you in freland, that you would come over, and spend the Christmas holidays at her “ palais d'aleine*' for such her villa literally is# Now that you are here, there can be no question aboutit, for you are not aware how much she is your friend.'*	'

“ And who, Madam,” said O’Don-nel, at last getting an opportunity to ask the question, as tur Ladyship paused for breath, “ who is this un-

known, but propitious deityr under what name is she to be invoked and thanked ?”

Ci Why, the person in question/’ said Lady Singleton, importantly, is no other than Adelaide, Countess of Llanberis,Baroness Boston of Llanberis in Wales, and of Burton Hall in Somersetshire; a heiress in her own right, at the head of a Welsh principality, and an English estate, which would make the territory of a German prince. She holds five boroughs in her hands, and is mistress of one of the largest hotels in London, and one of the most delightful villas in Surrey : add to this, that she is supreme bon-ton, a widow in the prime of life, with an only son not yet of age, and that nothing can exceed her societies in London, except her Christmas and Easterparties at Longlands. There you are sure to find whatever is most recherche. I must tell you, also, that Lady Llanberis is

VOL. II.	H

(jUllG 111 OUI W<lj---UOl lue It.dSl X>77"~

lish. She is a "Welshwoman, with strong feelings and great animation of character; and, as we would say in France, toute pétillante. She married, unhappily, at eighteen, was a widow at twenty, and has maintained her

4/	7

enviable independence for seventeen - years, relusing the best matches in England.—-But I must be off; there are the carriages drawn up. I am obliged to accompany the bridal party to Shropshire, to Henshaw’s uncle’s ; but 1 shall certainly meet you at Long-lands in less than ten days; for you must go immediately if you mean to go at all. Meantime leave me your address, for I shall enclose you the Countess’s invitation the moment I hear from her. I am now sending her off a packet of music and china, and shall have an answer by express tomorrow; for she lias as many expresses on the road as your Irish secretaries.

Remember Longlands is near the town of-------

O’Don nel gave his card of address for a coffee-house in the neighbourhood of his obscure lodging; and Lady Singleton, without affording him time or opportunity for reply or observation, rung for her woman, and bade him a friendly good-by ; adding, that all this time her daughters were waiting for her in the bride’s dressing-room.

The character which Lady Singleton had given O’Donnel of Lady Llanberis appeared to him romantic as was her predilection in his favor, which evidently arose out of Lady Singleton’s exaggerated descriptions; and now thoroughly convinced that Lady Florence, poor and absent, could not be his unknown benefactress, his suspicions turned upon this distinguished person,” whose immense wealth, caprice, expresses, and above all, sending six

H 2

xiunarea mues 10 asic a stranger, unseen, unknown, to become an inmate of her family, seemed to warrant any unlikelihood imagination could suggest; for he deemed it next to impossible that he could have been invited to come such a distance, but for his own benefit and advantage; and he had nearly decided on accepting an invitation, which, as he could not expect an answer from Germanv for a fortnight

v	o

to come, would at least involve him in no difficulty, or lead to anv inconve-nience, and which would enable him to verify or disprove his doubts, and perhaps become the means of discharging an obligation, by which he was still resolved not to benefit. The length of his visit would of course be determined by circumstances; but as he paid it with reluctance, he calculated upon its being short. To one in his tone of mind and spirits, it could not

fail to be wearisome and oppressive. The next evening he received the following letter from Ladv Singleton.

Dear Colonel,

I enclose Lady Llanberis's answer and invitation. Yon will perceive our Countess is quite tête monté about you.

Your’s, a la hate et au revoir,

Em ELY SlXGLETQN.

Letters enclosed.

To the Lady Viscountess Singleton.

My dear Lady S.

The arrival of our hero is really quite too good, too lucky an event. My secret 25, however, I hope quite safe. At ail events send him off without a moment’s delay: I want to have him here

h 3

before tbe house fills, that we may understand each other a little. Dispatch him, then, immediately, I beg—1 combi and!

Adieu,

Adelaide Llanberts.

card.

The Countess of Llanberis requests the honor of Colonel O’DonnePs company, during the holidays, at Long-lands.

Dec. 20th.

O’Donnel had scarcely run his eyes over these notes and card, when he wrote and dispatched the following bid let.

To the Lady Viscountess Singleton.

Dear Madam,

I beg earnestly to know whether I

am concerned in the 4C secret’’ alluded to by the Countess of Llanberis; entreating your Lad}^ship to suspend your judgment on the seeming impertinence of a curiosity, which is, however, justified by the feeling out of which it arises.

I am, dear Madam,

Your Ladyship’s most obliged, and obedient servant,

O’Donnel.

London, Dec. 20th.

In return to this note, he received a little twisted paper, containing the following answer.

Mais quelle bevue! to send you Lady L.’s letter. The fact is, I scarcely read it; but you ought not to have .seen it. I entreat that you will not notice the secret, when you see the Countess. She will take her own time for

TJ Æ

explaining herself to you : suffice it to say, she did not ask you from Ireland for nothing. She has views in your

favor, which----but I cannot tell you

more without telling ail. Only think of Mr. Henshaw forgetting the ring, and no one minding it till the ceremony was half over! Lady Llanberis will expect you without delay: pray don't disappoint her. She has the best heart in the world; but she is not used to disappointments.

Adieu, dear Sir.

E. S.

These notes fully justified O’Don-nel's suspicion. It was this 66 best heart in the world/’ to which he was known only by his misfortunes, that he stood so largely indebted ; and with something of the reluctance with which pride owns itself indebted, and with something of the eagerness with which

self-love longs to behold the person who has done the honors by its feelings,, he resolved to set off the next day for Longlands. When there, he determined to abide by Lady Singleton’s advice, and suffer the generous delicacy of his unknown benefactress to take its own time for explanation. He thought it natural she should wish to know the object of her beneficence, and felt uncomfortable at the difficulty which must arise in rejecting [a gift, bestowed with such confidence in its

r

acceptance. There was one term, however, he did not like in Lady Llanbe-ris’s note: it was the term, our hero. He had all the susceptibility to ridicule which men feel who have lived in the great world, and know its influence. What exaggerated descriptions could Lady Singleton have made in his character, to obtain him what was in his own opinion so ridiculous a soli 6

briquet» He trembled, lest, when forced upon the irksomeness of speaking* of himself, he had let fall some idle word, out of which the busy fancy of his au« ditress had woven a tale of wonder. Conjecture, however, was idle. Time and the hour" would unravel all. llav* ing first, therefore, expended more upon the equipment of Me.Rory than his circumstances could afford, and committed Bran to the care of his landlord (who consented to take him en pension till his master’s return), Q'Donnel and his servant set off in a hack chaise for Longlands.

This magnificent villa was but fifteen miles from London, Although every object was involved in one hue, by a deep snow which had fallen on the preceding night, still it appeared an highly ornamented spot. It was near three o’clock in the afternoon when he arrived ; and he was evidently not the

first guest, for his humble chaise was for some time prevented from drawing up to the door, till a carriage which had arrived a few minutes before was unloaded.

CHAPTER 14

When the carriage which had preceded O’Donnel’s had driven from under the porte-cocher, the folding doors were shut; for the porter supposed that the hack chaise which followed contained some of the servants, and would drive to the offices : and though several servants appeared at the windows of the anti-rooms on either side the hall, yet the porter, when apprized of his mistake., had rung his bell repeatedly, before any footman or groom of the chambers appeared to receive a guest who approached in so humble a vehicle.

The appearance of Me. Rory, who was the first to leave the chaise, and who stood gazing with astonishment at

the splendor of the nail, was notmuch calculated to do awa the impression which the shabbiness of their equipage had made. With the little sum which O’Donnel had spared him, he had purchased a tawdry livery of some long-past sheriffalty, which was so much too small for its gigantic wearer, as to suspend his arms at a considerable distance from his sides.

O’Donnel had not perceived the outré appearance of his man, until he had taken off his great coat in the hall ; but mortifying as it was, the circumstance was then irremediable.

Me. Rory’s strange figure instantly excited a titter amongst the servants, which the distinguished air and appearance of his master as instantly suppressed. O’Donnel gave in his name, which Me. Rory (though previously instructed) had forgotten to do ; and leaving his servant in the hands of the footman, was ushered by a groom of

the chambers through a suite of rooms to the saloon, which terminated the range. It was a room of great dimensions and magnificence. The servant announced him in a low voice, and O’Donnel walked to the head of the apartment, which he perceived was already occupied.

On two loungers, at either side of one of the fire-places, sat, or rather reclined, two gentlemen, evidently but just arrived; the one with his hand in his waistcoat pocket, and his eyes half-closed, leaned back upon a pile of cushions ; the other, a little more upright in his posture, though not less torpid in his air, sat in motionless contemplation of the seal of his own watch. To CVDonners slight bow, they returned an almost imperceptible inclination of the head ; and though he remained standing for nearly ten minutes at the fire, they neither moved nor spoke.

O’Donnel, to relieve the awkwardness of his situation, then walked to another fire-place, and taking down a volume of Voltaire’s plays, which lay upon the chimney-piece, soon lost sight of his silent and unsocial companions, in the sufferings of44 Merope.”

A silent quarter of an hour had thus elapsed, when the gentleman of the seal, addressing the other in a low voice, said :

44 Charles, did you observe any thing near the third mile-stone?”

44 A man hanging from a tree ?” asked Charles, in the same tone and key.

The interrogator nodded assent, and Charles nodded an affirmative. Another ten minutes of silence ensued ; and it is impossible to say how much longer it might have lasted, but for the interruption of sounds of distant laughter, which, though they made O'Donnel start and turn round, effected

no change of position in either of the silent gentlemen.

A scarlet curtain was now suddenly drawn aside by a little page in a fantastic dress, who came from behind it, and held back a glass door, which disclosed a beautiful conservatory, “ redolent of spring/’ amidst the snows of December. Along this conservatory glided a group on the very tiptoe of high spirits, preceded by one who appeared to be the leader of the party in the most literal sense of the word. It was a woman, who seemed to have just touched on that period of life, ou Von n est plus jolie mais ou V on est encore belle. Her figure was distinguished, her air decided; and there was in her countenance and laugh (for she was still laughing when she entered the saloon) an exuberance of spirits beyond what habitual cheerfulness, or even casual gaiety, bestows.

Without observing O'Donnel, who stood parallel with the door of the conservatory, she advanced to the gentlemen at the head of the room, and giving her hand to the knight of the seal, who but half rose to meet her, exclaimed :

“ Good Heavens, Duke ! who would have thought of finding you here? Why, this is really too good : I did not expect you these ten days.—Lord Charles, you never wrote me a syllable of this.” As she spoke, $he put her hand into that of the other silent gentleman, with a little air of intelligence, which spoke much more than her address to him conveyed.

“ I thought,she continued, “ you could not possibly get off that Lady Loton’s invitation, and her plays, and all the rest of her set-out.”

ii It was not easy/* said Lord /

Charles ; 44 but my brother at last de-

cided upon not going to her, and came to you by preference/’

“ This is all de mieux e)i mieux," said Lady Llanberis (tor she it was), with the most lively satisfaction in her countenance: “ people imagine it is easy to get good society in their villas ; it happens to be just the contrary, especially good men; and this, perhaps* Lady Loton will find, notwithstanding her French plays—but, oh ! I wish you had come a little sooner: we have been really quite amused this morning/* While her Ladyship went on, the rest of the party, who knew the Duke and Lord Charles, made their bows and nods; and those who did not know them, grouped round the fire. “ We are just returned from the ferme ornée,” she continued, ff where we had quite a scena between my Scotch steward and Mr. Dexter: you must know Mr. Dexter, Duke; he has ask-

ed me for a letter of introduction for - your Grace, which I mean to give him.—You will like him most amazingly, I promise you : he was introduced to me by Lady Singleton : he is passionately fond of agricultural pursuits, and brought me a letter from her to permit him to visit my ferme ornée: well, he wanted to try a mode of fattening turkeys here, which he has effected with great success at the late Mr. Glentworth’s place in Ireland; and which is by cramming them with pebbles: we all went with him to be present at the experiment, and out of two turkeys, only one was choaked.— But so bored a person as poor Me. Far-lane ! he stood by, absolutely writhing in agony for the fate of his turkeys, till unable any longer to suppress his emotion, he burst out in such a tirade of Scotch invective: oh ! he is worth any thing! his accent alone is worth his

wages: nothing can be more ridicu-

O	O

Jously entertaining. — I shall certainly raise his salary next year, and then, Mr. Dexter—by the bye, Miss Carlisle, what has become of Mr. Dexter?”

6C Why, don’t you remember,” replied the young lady, laughing, “ that you sent him for some sort of patent cork, he recommended for shuttlecocks : he will be frozen to death, poor man, on the top of that horrible stage, Lady Llanberis.”

“ Poor man ! so he will,” returned Lady Llanberis : u but it was his own fault; he was in such a hurry to de" liver his letter of introduction to Lord N. which I gave him, for he wants something in the Treasury; 1 don’t know what : and when tLie Treasury is in question, Lord N. is the person beyond every one:—but, good heavens!” exclaimed her Ladyship, in a

tone of amazement, to Lord Charles: c; who is that very magnificent looking person, at the lower fire-place ?,J

“ Don’t know at all,** replied Lord Charles, coldly.

“ Not know! Was he here before you ?”

“ i rather think not/’

And was he not announced; and did not you hear his name ?”

“ Not exactly ; I believe it was a Major something, or a Colonel somebody—MajorO Flaherty, perhaps; for it was an 0, and sounded Irish,”

“ O’Donnell” said her Ladyship eagerly.

O J

c; Possibly,” replied his Lordship languidly, and sunk again on his cushions; while Lady Llanberis bounded for weird to welcome her unknown guest:	with equal ease, though not

equal eagerness, Colonel O’Donnel advanced to meet her Ladyship.

“ ï am afraid,” he said, with a smile,

“ that 1 am reduced to the awkward necessity of announcing' myself to the Countess of Llanberis.”

“ No, no,5' she interrupted : “ there is no necessity : you are,** she added, throwing her eyes rapidly over him, IC you are not to be mistaken, Colonel O’Donnel.”

O’Donnel howed, and her Ladyship seating herself on a sola near the fireplace where he stood, motioned to him to take a seat beside her, and began a conversation with him with all the ease of familiar acquaintance. The group at the other fire-place raised their eyeglasses, directed their glances to the stranger, and, alter a few vague enquiries, of fS who is lie ?’* 41 does any one know him ?” they turned away their eyes, and resumed the topics of conversation, which their curiosity about the stranger had for a moment interrupted.

Meantime Lady Llanberis bad run

over a variety of subjects with astonishing rapidity, which Colonel O’Donnei endeavoured to follow without being able to join : she asked several questions about his romantic retreat in Ireland ; talked of Milesian chiefs and heroes ; of the Emperor of Germany and the late Queen of France; of Irish mountains and foreign courts; of Voltaire’s littie theatre at Ferney, and the wonderful bridge of Car rick-a-rede ; of her obligations to Lady Singleton, for presenting so desirable an acquisition to her circle of friends, and of his kindness in so readily accepting her invitation. She then, failing to prevail on him to take some refreshment in the adjoining coffee-room, proposed

that they should walk on the terrace %/

which skirted the back of the house, from whence the vie'.v at sun-set was splendidly fine; and rung for her page to bring her snow shoes.

“ I know,’* she continued, “ you

are a worshipper or the picturesque:—I hear there is nothing so beautiful as your descriptions, and I expect, after having seen Longlands with you, that I shall have a much better opinion of it; for, I am told, you give interest to the most trifling object by your mode of detailing it; but, as Lady Singleton says, that is a gift from Heaven. Ï really long. Colonel O’Don-nel, to hear some of your beautiful Irish stories. I love stories beyond every thing, and I hear you are a raconteur of the very first order.” To all this, her guest had only an opportunity to bow or smile, yet, pleased with an empressement so flatteringly in his favor, struck by the seeming freshness of a character which seemed but loo romantic for the circumstances of its owner, he forgave the incoherence, the whim, and idle curiosity, which accompanied them. While her Ladyship was still talking, in expectation of

the snow shoes, a gentleman advanced from the group at the further end of the room, and in passing her, threw a fine rather than a gentlemanlike figure into the most extraordinary pantomimic contortions.

Lady Llanberis burst into an immoderate fit of laughing : “ Go, Mon Arle-quin/* she cried: 44 you are too ridiculous.0 Mon Arlequin now twisted his head upon his shoulders with a ce-* ierity of rotation not inferior to that of Grimaldi himself ; ‘and, affecting to make a vaulting leap, jumped through the door, and disappeared. Lady Llanberis observed, still laughing : 66 I suppose you know who that is, Colonel O’Donnel ?”

4; No, indeed, Madam,” said O’Don-nei, unable also to repress a laugh : 64 I have not that pleasure/*

44 Indeed ! 1 thought every body knew him ; why that is the celebrated green parrot.**

O’Donnel opened bis eyes.

<c Yes/’ continued bor Ladyship, seriously: 66 that is the famous Mr. Frederick Carlisle, who made the fortune of my last masquerade, and of his own reputation, last winter, in the oharacter of a green parrot : nobody had ever heard of the Carlisles: they were complete mauvaise ton, or rather no ton at all ; till Lady Singleton, who picks up all sorts of odd people, met them at a Lady Mayoress’s assembly, where the two Mr. and three Miss Carlisles made the whole frais of the night. The Mr. Carlisles did a number of comical tricks, and danced a jms de deux upon stilts, and Miss Carlisle turned a wax candle into a city procession ; and made such astonishing likenesses of the Mayor and Sheriffs in a few minutes, that models were taken from them the next day, I am told, by Bacon: then, the other Misses waltzed and sung glees with

iherr brother; and, in short, there was nothing so good, as Lady Singleton told me ; so I had them all at my masquerade: the girls played, sung, and danced, as Savoyards do : Mr. Carlisle went first as an Hessian boot ; and then imitated a knife-grinder’s wheel, till all the teeth in the room were on an edge ; but Mr. Frederick Carlisle completely carried the night. Since that, the whole family are quite recherché; they make every thing go off well ; and if they refused to come to me, Ï should certainly shut up my house.—* There is a tiresome old mother, whQ always insists on being asked with them, and that is a bore; but it is al* ways the case, whenever you pick up & genius, or something amazingly amusing, you are sure to have the clog of 3 vulgar father, or a quizzical mother, or something of that sort ; but the fact is* every thing has its price, and if one

1 2

must be amused, one must pay for it, that's all.,j

As her Ladyship concluded this speech, a tall, pale,, shadowy looking young man, with his mouth and eyes puckered into a look of thoughtfulness, and a pair of black-rimmed spectacles raised above his eye-brows, entered the room, and laid at Lady Llanberis’s feet a large boc k, bound in green velvety applying to the act the worn-out French anecdote of the court wit to his queen : “ U uni-vers est a vos pieds.”*

“ Is that your own, Mr. Mussen ?” asked her Ladyship: “ it is very pretty: well, have you written quantities of pretty things in my album!” turning over the leaves carelessly.

“ No, Madam,” he replied, with an air of pedantry: “Queen Mab hath

* A bail French pun — the queen vas sitting on the edge of a bowling-green, uni-verd.

not been with me ; the muses have turned jilts; Pegasus become restive; and the waters of Helicon muddy as a London fountain/’

t; O, by the bye, Hr. Mussen,” said her Ladyship, yawning: “ do repeat your impromptu on Frederick Carlisle, for Colonel O’DonneL—Colonel, I beg to present Mr. Mussen to you/* The gentlemen bowed.

O

“ Pray excuse me, Lady Llanberis: I never could repeat from memory any • thing I either said or wrote; besides, it was severe, and I wish the thing to be forgotten/’

O

u Not at all/5 said Lady Llanberis, vawning again with an increasing ’languor, as if she had exhausted her vitality : “ you know he likes to be talked of, well or ill. I have been just telling Colonel O’Donnel, what an amazingly clever person he is: don’t you think so, Mr. Mussen ?’5

&,r Why, Mr. Frederick Carlisle has

o

his talent, Madam,” replied Mr. Mussel) : 44 he has what Gall names the Organ of Pantomime in great perfection.”

44 Organ of Pantomime !” repeated Lady Llanberis, reviving by the force of her own laugh : 44 oh, how good ! I must read Gall; you must write to town for me for Gall, Mr. Mussen ; you must, indeed ;—is he a poet ?”

44 On the contrary, Madam, he is a German physiologist : I believe his system is the most ingenious thing in the world, and I think we have now pretty substantial grounds for believing that there is an organ in the brain for every affection of the mind, for every act of volition, from the whipping of a top to the writing of epic.”

44 1 must have that book by return of post, Mr. Mussen ; 1 must, indeed : sit down immediately and write for a set; nay, you may as well write for two or three sets, one for each of the

rooms : those are just the kind of hooks one should have lying about, they are so very amusing.”

44 I will obey your Ladyship this moment,” returned Mr. Mussen ; 44 but I must first give this little volume of Rousseau to Ladv Marv Savili, which

•	%/	\j	*

she begged me to bring her.”

44 Well, there she is at the other fireplace,” said Lady Llanberis: and as he

moved avvav, she observed:—44 That is

%/ 5

an amazingly tiresome young man : at first I thought him amusing enough, but he han°:s so on hands after a little: he is a protégée of Lady Mary Savill’s, who is at the head of all the bas-bleus in town.—There, that is Lady Mary, that Lady netting, who looks so tristey but who has no reason in the world for it, only that she likes a little misery. The D owager Duchess of Belmont, a great friend of mine, and out and out the most brilliant person I ever knew, says Lady Mary always puts her in

T 4,

mina oi nie rrencn actress, L>u-mes-nil’s speech c Ah ! c’etoit des beaux jours; J’etois bien malheureuse alors/ However, Lady Mary is a very clever person, and nearly connected with the present Duke of Belmont, whom Î believe you found here on your arrival, with his' brother, Lord Charles Savili ; and, as I happen to live particularly with that family, she is often with me: but come, I’ll present you to them all.**

Lady Llanberis then arose and led the way, accompanied by her new guest, and followed by the dwarf page and the snow shoes.

Colonel O’Donnel was now introduced in form to the Duke of Belmont and Lord Charles Savili, General and Lady Mary Savili, Mrs. Carlisle, her eldest son and three daughters, a Sir Gilbert Curzon, and a Mr. Augustine Wharton : the latter gentleman was so like, and yet so unlike, Lord Charles

Savill, that it was quite a puzzle to discover where the similitude or the dissimilitude existed, lie was younger by some years, and yet.he had his Lordship’s air of languid gravity and cold reserve : he was lower by a foot, and yet he had his Lordship’s dignified elevation of carriage; while his dress, even to the fold of his cravat, was & facsimile of Lord Charles’s. He was, however, no relation of the House of Savill : he was merely Lord Charles’s double, whom he considered as the mirror of fashion, the standard of bon ton,

u The glass, indeed, in which each noble 3011th Should dress himself.”

As soon as Lord Charles left the room,, which he did almost immedr ateiy on being presented to O’Donnel, this shadow of a shade’’ arose also from his pile of cushions, and with the

I 5

self-same step and stride, followed his prototype. After the bow of introduction was over, the group fell into their previous positions. Old Mrs. Carlisle was trying to keep the Duke awake, by an enumeration of her daughters* accomplishments, and the pains she had taken with their education. Lady Mary sat netting a purse in hair, while Mr. Mussen read to her in a low murmur the Pygmalion of Rousseau. She threw her eye,, however, occasionally on the General, who sat flirting with the eldest Miss Carlisle, who, however., as well as her sisters, was giving the attention of lier eyes to Colonel 0*Donnel : and Sir Gilbert Curzon was playing tetotum by himself, at a spider table, and winning every game with an exclamation of triumph of—“ Well done, egad! a,for all” every turn.

Lady Llanberis, who was beginning to yawn, suddenly roused on perceiv-

mg the book which'Colonel O Donnel had inadvertently carried with him from the other chimney-piece.

“ What have you gotten there ?” she asked.

<r I have just opened the Merope ” he replied.

“ Voltaire’s Merope!” said Llanberis, with the most pleasurable surprize marked in her countenance. “ You admire then Voltaire’s tragedies?”

<r Some of them : at least, I infinitely prefer him as a dramatist to any other French writer, as being less cold, less declamatory, and—’’

“ You do,1’ interrupted Lady Llan-beris, smiling : “ how very extraordinary !”

I am afraid then,’* said O’Donnel, “ my preference is not sanctified by your Ladyship’s opinion.”

“ Oh, on the contrary ; I quite idolize the tragedies of Voltaire: there is nothing ljke them : now pray, Colonel

O'Donnel, tel! me which of his pieces you prefer/'

“ It ‘is so long since I looked over any of them. Madam, that 1 am at a loss l?o\v to offer an opinion; but as well as I recollect, I preferred Mahomet for its strength., and Merope for its situations : but by far the finest acting play of all is, what the French called la Tragédie Chrétienne Zaire'*

“Zaire F’ repeated Lady Llanberis, in a tone of extacv ; “ you really prefer Zaire ? Good heavens, how extra-

ordinarv!”

%/

All her Ladyship’s first brilliant flow of spirits now returned.

“ Colonel, get me a chair, and another for yourself, and let us talk over this subject. How very odd !”

O’Domiel obeyed, wondering in what the oddity of his opinion consisted, which evidently had her approbation; yet extremely reluctant to renew a conversation which he conceited

would lead to the common places of verbal criticism, upon works and subjects long worn out, which he considered as the very worst taste, and fit only for the family discussions of blue stocking ladies and literary young gentlemen.

44 So/’ said Lady Llanberis, seating herself, and drawing the chair she intended for O’Donnel close to her own, and towards the fire-guard—cfso you prefer Zaire, Colonel Q’Oonnel.”

44 Not perhaps critically,” said O’Donnel, 44 but sentimentally, or rather by association. Many years are gone by since ¥ saw it acted at Paris : I was then at an age to be pleased with every thing, and most of all with such high wrought struggles between reeling and

O	CO	O

principle, love and religion, as are exhibited in the tender character of Zaire. I was enchanted with the overstrained sentiment of 4’ Je me croirois hai d’etr'e aime foiblementy*

and looked down upon every thing less energetic than

“ Je veux avec exces vous aimer et vous plaire.”

“ A note for your Ladyship,” interrupted a groom of the chambers.

“ Go on. Colonel O’Donnel,’* said Lady Llanberis, taking the note off the salver, and twisting it in her fingers, while her countenance, lighted up by the most brilliant animation, exhibited the varied expressions of amazement, triumph, and satisfaction.

“ No, Madam,” said O’Donnel, laughing. “ J believe I have just stopped where I ought.”

“ On the contrary, you have no idea how interesting, how peculiarly

delightful-----”

The page now advanced and said :

“ Your Ladyship’s snow shoes.”

“ Snow shoes!” she replied angrily. “ 1 don’t want snow shoes: I am frozen ; take them away and bring the fur

basket. So, Colonel, La tendre Zaire is your favorite, and le grand Oros-mane——”

44 The footman waits for your Ladyship’s answer to the note,” said the man.

44 What footman? Whose note?’* said Lady Llanberis. 44 There never were such tiresome servants ! I have no note/5

44 Dear,” said Miss Carlisle ; 44 you have torn it to pieces, Lady Llanberis.” 44 Well then, why will people send their notes so mal apropos.”

44 Who is it from, Saunders ?”

44 From the Lodge^ my Lady ; from Mrs. St. Leger.”

44 Oh, I thought so,” said Lady Llanberis ; 44 that woman has such a rage for note writing. Well., say J am busy, I am engaged.—I’ll send an answer: there, go.”

The servant retired.

44 I thought,” said Lady Mary, who

had advanced upon hearing the last quotation from Voltaire :	I	thought

Mrs. St. Léger was a great favorite: you talked of nothing else last winter;”

“ Yes, last winter, Lady Mary; but one cannot really go on admiring and talking of the same person winter after winter ; besides, all that sort of thing depends upon the set you live in. In the winter, and in the country, Mrs. Leger was all very well, but when I returned to town in the spring, it was quite another thing. It is impossible to Ret at any one in London. You

O	•/

know iny affection for my aunt Sel-bourne, it amounts to a positive passion ; yet though we live within two streets, I never could contrive to see her during the whole of last season. She lives among a description of persons with whom it is impossible to get on.”

u 1 know very little of Mrs. St. Leger,” said Lady Mary, tc but I think

hcr interesting. She is very unhappy,” added Lady Mary with a sigh, “ in her married life, and this vein of sadness runs through all her tales \ there is an exquisite pathos in all she writes: do you not think so, Mr. Mussen ?”

Mr. Mussen, who never spoke but t; in quaint and courtly phrase,” and ivho, though hut a blockhead by nature,, was a coxcomb and a pedant by assum-tion, was marshalling his critical forces for an answer, when Lady Llanberis exclaimed in her usual quick way 44 I think her still a very charming writer, Lady Mary, if you mean that; and 1 have indeed a very high opinion of her taste and discrimination. Last winter, when 1 was so low, at the time of your sister-in-law’s death, Duke,

**	t

poor Lady Charles, I was going to give up the world, and i entrusted Mrs. St.

Leger to make out a list of particular friends for me, with whom i meant to live exclusively. I left it all to her; but

you know I did return to the world, and the list went for nothing: however, FI! ask her here, Lady Mary, if you like; she only lives at the end of the park. Stay, my page shall write to her.”

She beckoned to the page, a French lad of the most diminitive size, with a face, in spite of ugliness, full of intelligence: he was now holding the fur basket, as he before held the snow shoes.

“ Mon nain,” said her Ladyship, 44 va-t-en m’écrire le plus joli billet du monde a Mad. St. Leger, et pries la bien de nous donner sa société.”

The dwarf, with a familiar grin, flew to obey her orders, and to write 44 le plus joli billet du monde,” upon any subject it pleased heaven.

44 Oh., stay, mon nain, don’t trouble yourself. Lady Mary, we will walk to her cottage some day and ask her:' she likes people of fashion to visit her cottage. There, Floris, you may go.

Did you ever see such a little monster” she continued, looking after him with a smile of admiration : 44 he is such a treasure. I have been teized to death with pages : they would all grow so tall, and just as one has broken them in.”

44 I think, however,’* said the General, ‘4 your La’ship has nothing to fear from the aspiring views of that young gentleman, nor Mrs. St. Leger from the charms of her correspondent.^

44 Is Mrs. St. Leger,” asked the Duke, gradually rousing from his stupor by the excitement of reiterated pinches of snuff—44 is Mrs. St. Leger the woman that writes the books?**

4f Yes,” said Lady Mary : 44 your Grace must have read her Tales of Sorrow, her Tears of Sensibility, and Luxury of Woe.”

44 No/’ replied his Grace :	I	make

it a rule never to read any thing which can affect me. I dare say she is a very

larmoyante personage. Lady Llanberis, an’t she ?”

44 On the contrary, she is extremely amusing, and tells very good stories. [ think you will like her of all things, Duke.*'

44 Does she tell as good stories as the Du chess ?>5 asked Mr. Carlisle.

44 Good heavens! no: there is nothing, there never was nor could be any thing like the Duchess.’5

44 Of course you mean the Duchess par excellencesaid the General ; 44 the Duchess Dowager of Belmont.55

Lady Mary and Mr. Mussen sneered.

To be sure,55 said Lady Llanberis, 44 there is no such creature: Î intended to surprize you all, but truth must out: she comes here to-day.55

A pretty general exclamation of pleasure followed this intelligence. Mr. Carlisle spoke of her in raptures: his sister said she was a talented creature. Lady Marv and her tall thin

y	y

sentimental-looking friend were silent, and exchanged looks.

44 I wonder she is not arrived,0 said Lady Llanberis impatiently:	pray,

General, step into the anti-room, and send one of the grooms of the chambers to the porter, to know if any of her people are corned

At that moment a servant entered, and uttered something in a low voice to Lady Llanberis, who returned :

44 Oh, very well: Til go directly.,s She then in a half whisper said to the Duke: 64 Lord Charles is in my dressing-room ; will you join us ?”

The Duke nodded his head. Lady Llanberis then left the room, and the circle broke up.

O’Donnel, happy to be released, and more fatigued than amused by all that had passed, retired to the apartment prepared for him, under the guidance of one of the servants; and then throwing himself into a chaise lounge,' he

endeavored to form some opinion of Lady Llanberis’s character from the little he had seen of her. He well knew that it was the natural tendency of power, in whatever form it came, to swell the human heart: but its effects in her seemed only to have unbridled the imagination. It was difficult to form an estimate of her character on so short an acquaintance, but»she appeared to him to be a person possessing great natural vivacity; feelingquickly, acting promptly, and deciding inconsiderately. Her approbation of such a character as Mr. Dexter, and other little instances of false judgment and idle whim, he considered as a vice common to her class, when undistinguished by natural superiority of character or education ; they were rather generic than individual, and were by no means incompatible with that generous prodigality which had lavished its bounty on a stranger at the

mere representation or another. Her enthusiasm about Voltaire he did no-t at all understand, neither did he enter into her regret for the loss of Lady Charles Savilh when by Lord Charles’s summons to her dressing-room he appeared to be her favored lover: but least of all did he understand her inviting himself at a distance of six hun-dred miles to her house, after having already done so much in his favor.* What further benefit did this warmhearted and prodigal woman mean to confer upon one who had no claims upon the generous interest which she took in his fate? If she had interest to restore him to his rank in the English service, it would be romantic folly, little short of madness, to decline it : but her money, her pecuniary benefaction—on that subject he had no second opinion, and he resolved on carrying her letter and its contents, which he had brought from London,

i/	1	1

of being always ready to return it whenever the wished-for opportunity «houid occur.

CHAPTER 15

In addition to those who already had made their appearance in the saloon, a few strangers took their place at the dinner-table, at which conversation circulated languidly, in murmurs neither general nor audible, save only on the part of Lady Llanberis, who talked chiefly to her Maitre d’Hotel, as he stood behind her chair, in terms of reproof or approbation of the several dishes which decked the table. The Duke, who sat on her right hand, and Lord Charles, who was on her left, commended or disapproved, as their opinions dictated. Before the second course was removed, the sound of car* riage wheels passing the dining-room window caught Lady Llanberis's ear.



“ It is the Duchess/’ she said, dropping her knife and fork, and she immediately sent one of the servants to know if it was, indeed, this ardently expected guest. The man returned with answer, that it was the French cook, going to town for the opera.

“ How tiresome!” said Lady Llan-beris : 44 poor Le Maitre’s passion for the opera amounts absolutely to folly. Do you know, he might have had double the wages he gets from me, if he would have engaged with the Irish Lord-Lieutenant; but there is no opera at Dublin, and he refused. But I wonder what can detain the Duchess.”

“ I did not know you expected this new passion of your’s/* said Lord Charles, peevishly.

cc Who—the Dowager? To be sure, you are quite right : she is my passion, 1 confess: there is nobody so amusing, nobody so brilliant. Is it not so, Duke?"

CÉ She is very out of the way, I think ; very eccentric : don’t you, Charles ?”

fc Eccentric enough/’ returned Lord Charles, with an equivocal smile, between superciliousness and irony, which was immediately repeated by the servile muscles of Mr. Wharton.

“ A little too eccentric/* said Lady Mary, with a contemptuous laugh, jwhich was re-echoed by Mr. Mussen, "Every symptom of irritation now exhibited itself on the countenance of Lady Llanberis, and her delightful smile was instantly overshadowed. She struggled a little with her peccant hu* mour, and then with a laugh, more ii) anger than in gaiety, she said :

“ Oh ! you are jealous of her, Lady Mary; you know you are/*

6C Who I, Lady Llanberis ?” said Lady Mary, colouring deeply—54 of her ? of such a person as that V*

k 2

"lhe General threw a fearful look at his wife, and affected to laugh.

Oh ! yes, you know you are,” said Lady Llanberis, gaily ; and now quite composed by the discomposure of her guest: “ You know that it happens to be just now the fashion to admire such a person as that, and the General—” “ Les gens, les gens/' said the Duke, looking round at the servants; and Lady Llanberis,, with difficulty submitting to the prudent caution, added : “ Well, I have done; but you may all say as you will : you men, atleast, either are> or must be in love with her. She will be a personage with you all, yet, I promise you that.”

“ Elle l'est, le fut, ou le doit être,'* I suppose, said O’Donnel.

“ Exactly,** said Lady Llanberis. “ Colonel O’Donnel, I’ll take wine with you. Saunders, go to the porter, and enquire if any of the Duchess of Belmont’s people are come. By the

bye, Duke, Ï hear she has retained all your uncle’s old establishment/'5

“Very possibly/5 returned the Duke. We are not particularly interested in her arrangements/’ said Lord Charles? dryly.

The conversation was now changed by Sir Gilbert’s giving an account of a riot at the opera, which every body had read in the 54 Morning Post,” and before the servant had returned, the object of his enquiry was, for the present at least, forgotten.

When the ladies rose from the table, the noble hostess appointed Lord Charles to do the honors, and as she passed O’Donnel, who stood up to open the door, she said, with a gracious smile :

I shall tell the Duchess of your prophetic quotation, you may depend upon it.”

The gentlemen sat but a short time after the ladies, and though O’Donnei

took no part in the conversation, which was at once cold, feeble, and desultory, he was happy to be released from a situation, in which, in every sense, he found himself a stranger. * Accustomed to foreign manners, he disliked a mode of society which excluded that se?i upon which the variety and contrast which gives charm to all society de*

u	*

pends. With women there is always some point of sympathy to be found; but men, holding together in accidental societies, chiefly by general discussions, are repelled rather than attracted, by the display of opinion, which, from the Varieties of habits, interests, and education, seldom tend to agreement. What, therefore, such conversations gain in strength they lose in enjoyment, even at the time when social pleasure is, or ought to he, the sole object of pursuit. With women, on the contrary* conversation rarely dwells Upon abstractions; feelings the most

gracious naturally arise, and insensibly animate the speakers by an almost imperceptible play of the passions, imparting to discussion a charm, rather felt, perhaps, in its operation, than understood in its cause.

O’Donnel loved imthesex that heart which never lays by, that imagination which never reposes, and even that little vein of honest coquetry, which exists more or less in all, from the desire, almost innate in women, of pleasing, and being pleased. As far as be could judge, he would not have chosen his friend, still less his mistress, from the circle he was going to join; but, after all, they were women ; and the first view of their light draperie*, as he entered the drawing-room, gave a cheering impulse to his spirits, which the coldness and insipidity of the party he had left had sunk to their lowest ebb.

Notwithstanding the little severities which had passed between Lady Llan-

beris and Lady Mary Savill, he found them amicably seated over a chess board ; Lady Mary very philosophically sustaining a compleat defeat; Lady Llanberis in all the wildest intoxication of conquest. It was impossible to conceive spirits more raised by a cause more trivial: Lady Mary refused to play any more ; Lady Llanberis had declared she would play all night, and that all amusements in the world were reduced to nothing, when placed in comparison with chess.

“ Come then, Colonel O’Donnel,” she added, on his making some observation on her excellent play, you shall convince me I am the best player in the world ; for I dare say you are the next best, and I mean to beat you.”

“ I hope your Ladyship will pardon my firm resolution to disappoint you,” said O’Donuel, taking Lady Mary's seat.

44 I have an hereditary right to be a good player : there was even a tenure tin my family held upon a game of chess,* the moves of which are only made once in a century.”

44 Oh, charming! delightful !” said Lady Llanberis, arranging her men with the greatest eagerness. 44 I expect every ' thing from this game. Now, do your worst ; and do not act as Mr. Dexter does, play like an angel, till the game is nearly ended, and then let me win it one cannot tell how ; not but I should infallibly beat him, at all events, but one would like a little play for it.f>

44 Mr. Dexter, perhaps,** said O’Don-nel, 44 is like Voltaire’s protege, who made it a point to let the philosopher beat him at chess; for chess, like the tooth-ache, is too much for even philosophy itself : I mean Pere Adam, who,

* See Miss Brook’s relics of Irish poetry,

K 5

however, was. not le premier des horn* mes”

“ Who? Mr. Dexter,” said Lady

Llanberis, making her first move.

“ I was speaking of Le Pere Adam,**

said CPDonnel drily.

The game went on now with great

spirit on the part of Lady Llanberis*

who exclaimed from time to time,

There is no such game, nothing like

it. I shall certainly introduce chess-

*-

parties, regular chess-parties, in Lon* don —there, check again! vou may as well give over, Colonel; you are bea* ten, or next to it ; you are, you may depend on it..”

O’Donnel was indeed playing with great carelessness ; in the first instance, because he at once perceived her Ladyship’s play was without plan or system, and might be overtaken, whenever he pleased ; in the next, because while her Ladyship thought him pondering over a move. Ids attention, for the last

five minutes, had been wholly ingrossed by another object.

It was fixed upon a person, a lady, who, unannounced and unperceived, had entered by the folding-doors at the extremity of the room, and gliding up to the further end, was received by a burst of pleasure, which marked her a most desirable acquisition to the group, now closely circled round her. In the mere act of thus passing up the room^ there was nothing—the manner was every thing. It was that playful, stealing: motion, at once childish and dra-

O	9

matic; it was the finger pressed upon the lip to solicit silence from the only ^person in the circle whose eye observed her : it was that light, noiseless step, “ a petits talons’* which became an accomplice in her attempt at surprising the unwary; it was, in a word, that mixture of feminine grace and infantine playfulness, which, charming in a child.

would have made the fortune of an actress.

Of the face of this welcome intruder 0‘Donnel could not judge, for he had but a transient view of her profile, as she emerged from behind a screen at the back of Lady Llanberis’s chair. The figure, however, was rather picturesque than fine, and seemed to borrow its chiefcharm from theattitude and motion into which it was thrown. A travelling Polish dress announced the stranger to be a fresh arrival. A sable cap, held a little forward in the right hand, left a head still more sable exposed to view.

“ Allons, Colonel/5 said Lady Llan-beris, impatient for his move, while meditating her own. “ Your hereditary talent is deserting you fast. I perceive we are playing this game as if it were tor the tenure you mentioned.”

44 May I beg to ask your Ladyship,"

gàid O'Donnel, making a careless move, who is that lady who has just entered ?”

“ Lady ! what lady?—there! check again—that ? that is the Duchess—miserable, miserable ! Is that vour best play ? Let me see—the Duchess of -— What are you dreaming about ?—the Duchess of Belmont.’*

“ The lady you have so ardently expected. The veni, vidi vici lady?” asked O’Donnel, in a tone of astonishment.

“ Yes, the same, there—so much for your Bishop,” continued Lady Llan-beris, wholly occupied by her game, and indifferent to all the ladies in the world.

O’Donnel, a little amused, and a good deal surprized, now gave himself up to his game,, took piece after piece, beat his fair antagonist from right to left, recovered his ground, and in spite of the increasing irritability and peevish exclamations of Lady Llanberis, had

nearly orougnt tne game to an issue, when Miss Carlisle, running up to the table, said :

te Oh ! Lady L. you are losing every thing; the Duchess never was in such force;—she has been overturned, got into a public-house for shelter, and has made such a story out of it !”

Repeated laughter at the head of the room attested the veracity of this account ; and Lady Llanberis, reduced to the last extremit}7, with only a piece and two pawns remaining, and now as much annoyed as before she had been elated, out of temper, and out of patience, arose from her seat :

“ There/' said she, “ take the game, Colonel; it is not worth holding out/1 and away she flew with a new ly awakened enthusiasm, while O’Donnel cried after her, laughing, “La d cone prend la dame;” and convinced that Mr. Dexter and le bon Ptre Adam were very sensible men, pushed away the board, threw

himself upon a sofa near it, and contemplated the party at the further end of the room.

The Duchess was carelessly seated on the arm of a Sofa; Lady Llanberis reclined on a tabouret at her feet ; every body else stood in a circle ; and though he could not hear what her Grace was saying, he perceived she spoke with great animation of gesture? and was listened to with great attention and applause.

Satisfied with this view, O’Donners thoughts turned on himself, and the contrast of his own actual state with the brighter destiny of these children of fortune and prosperity. Exiled by necessity, almost proscribed by restriction, without a home, without a friend, without even means of subsistence* beyond the hoped-for reward of services, yet to be performed in a cause unanimated by patriotism, in which no feeling was interested, no ambition

louseu. ne Mievv mai ne naci no place in the society upon which he now looked, but that which whim had accorded, or charity bestowed. He knew the place to which his birth, his talents, and character, entitled him: but did others acknowledge the claim he could so proudly have supported, had he been put to the test ? Oh no I — the poor, the disfranchized Irishman, the disbanded officer, in vain sought to support his flagging spirits with dreams of what had been. True, he was descended from the powerful and the great, allied to warriors and chiefs ; the blood of princes ran in his veins; the spirit of the soldier and the gentleman guided his actions. It mattered not: What was, was felt. Poor, unknown, without rank, without consideration ; without even those arts by which the sordid r se, without acquiescence or toleration for that weakness and vanity which reward the hypocrisy of which

itself is the dupe, he felt more than ever the desolation of his fate ; and he regretted more than ever that he had been Jed into a society, from which he could expect neither similitude, sympathy, nor coincidence ; and whose brilliancy served only to cast a browner shadow over the darkness of his own contrasted misfortunes.

He now wished he had intrusted hi® secret to Lady Singleton, and remained in the humble obscurity so suited to his circumstances. The wish, however, was vain ; and he was still turning in his thoughts how he should lead Lady Lianberis to the subject which had placed him in this disagreeable situation, when accidentally turning his eyes towards her, he perceived her's fixed on him, as if he were at that moment the subject of her conversation with the Duchess. They had both withdrawn from the circle which had now broken up : some were at

cards, others gone to the music-room,

and some to the billiard-table. O’Don-

nel was upon the point of retreating to

avoid this scrutiny ; for the Duchess

also seemed to direct her glance upon

him ; and her he wished particularly to

avoid. All that had been said, for or

against her, had alike disposed him

neither to admire nor approve. To her

partizans she seemed rather to be an

object oïcaprice than of esteem : to her

opponents, and they were members of

her own family, she was rather a sub-%/ 1

ject of contempt than dislike. These inferences, indeed, he felt were hastily drawn, from the very little he had heard other ; but whether j ust or false, he had no inclination to be known to a woman, whose rank and fashion promised only those light and tinsel qualities with which his own morbid feelings and sickly view of things would so ill accord.

In the very act, however, of rising

to depart from their gaze, the two ladies advanced towards him, arm in arm ; but contrary to his expectation, and much to his satisfaction, the}7, passed him by, and left the room together. He had now a full and close view of the Duchess’s face. He was satisfied that that bice was not unknown to him ; and notwithstanding the seeming impossibility, he was almost persuaded, •almost certain, that the Duchess Dowager of Belmont, and the sullen, blunt Governess of Lady Singleton, were one and the same person. He resumed his seat in the most profound astonishment, still bordering on incredulity. He endeavoured to revive in his mind the faint impressions made by a person in whom he had seen nothing to admire, and who had excited no further interest than was natural to feel for one who had expressed an anxiety for his safety, and perhaps eventually had preserved

his life. But if the Duchess of Belmont and Miss O’Halloran were indeed the same, which still he doubted, he was ready to ascribe to the acquisition of rank, power, and fortune, more than he had ever before attributed to their influence. If it were Miss O’Halloran, how could Lady Singleton have remained silent on the wonderful metamorphosis of her daughters’ governess : even the bustle of the wedding, and her eagerness in Lady Llanberis’s service,did notsatisfactorily account for the omission. Miss O’Halloran too a wit! Her slightest observations, “ irrigoit en bon-mot”—It was almost impossible.

While he was still lost in thought upon this miraculous, but still doubted transformation, Lady Llanberis returned to the room,andseated herself by him.

u Oh, by the bye,” she said, “ Colonel O’Donnel, I quite forgot that you

must naturally have seen the Duchess of Belmont, when she was with Lady Singleton in [reland.”

O’Donnel, now confirmed in his suspicions, replied laughing: 46 And I dare say, Madam, her Grace has forgotten the circumstance also/'

“No, no, indeed, she has not I assure you ; and she meant to have presented herself to you ; but her stock of spirits were quite run out, between her break-down on the road, and her little exertions since her arrival ; for she has really been quite charming. 1 must get her to repeat to you her adventure at the Cabaret: now, however, she is quite abattue: but so it is; we are all the slaves of nerves and spirits.”

“ And situationadded O’Donnel, amused at the idea of Miss O’Hallo-ran’s nervousness, whose image he had now before him, as he had seen her standing in her little red riding-hood oivthe shores of Glenarm.

“ And of situation !” returned Lady' Llanberis. “ The Duchess will no& come down again to-night, and I am going to sep with her in my dressing-room. There is certainly nobody like her. I have all my life preferred that sort of persons who come from nobody knows where, they are so much more amusing than people of fashion, who are nothing else hut people of fashion. The persons, of all others, I should have preferred knowing, were the first Catharine of Russia, the Polly Peachum Duchess of Bolton, and the tub-woman, who became grandmother to Queen Anne. Now the Duchess of Belmont, besides being one of this class, which is an immense thing in itself, is really a most extraordinary person, and has all sorts of talents : like yourself, she has the gift de raconter in great perfection, makes a good story out of nothing at all, and mimics in a manner which is nothing short of miraculous, Thep

you know her voice alone would faire fortune : that sort of a brogue which some of you Irish have, so soft and so caressante; the “ ah ! do,” and the st ah ! don’t:’’ besides her lausrh is

*	O

quite charming. It was her laugh which first-won the old Duke’s hearty as she sat at the foot of her father’s easel a mere child. But you know her story, I suppose.”

“ Not one word of it,” said O’Don-nel, now much amused, and not a little ^terested at her Ladyship’s enumeration of the charms of her favorite friend. “ But I am sure,” he added, I could not hear it more to the Duchess’s advantage, than from one so favorably disposed towards the subject as your Ladyship.”

CHAPTER 16

“O ! I assure you, Colonel, it is quite a little romance, and I wanted Mrs. St, Leger to make something of it, but she does not think the Duchess has the least of the heroine about her; for in fact she is not sentimental. However, I don't think the Duchess of Bolton's story any thing like so extraordinary: for, after all, there is nothing so very surprizing in a duke's marrying an actress : actresses are so very amusing, and have so many green-room anecdotes.—Well, then, for our heroine: Her father was an Irish artist, who went to study in Italy—O'Hallo-ran; aman who lived very celebrated, and died very poor. I am told he had all sorts of talents, wrote as well as he

painiea, ana was exuemeiy tiuucnuic in all his modes of thinking: in a word, just a person to catch the late Duke of Belmont, who resided at Florence when O’Halloran came to settle there. Every body know9 the Duke’s character—gene by the forms and decencies of English society; loving every country better than his own : a virtuoso; a roue; a very profligate and very agreeable creature. Well, he lived in Florence, en Prince, and was constant^ surrounded by needy geniirêès. At the head of these was O’Halloran : the Duke could not exist without him ; and he made him his companion, without being either his patron or friend. O'Hallo* rail’s evenings were all passed in dissipation at his palace, and the Duke's mornings in virtu, at the painter^ easel. The Duke came there at first for the sake of the father, and at last for the sake of the daughter, though old enough to be her grandpapa; for he YOiL,. II.	L

was quite a seconu iviarsnai rvicneiieu : there never was such another supera-nuated debauchee. Well, this daughter—she had all the talents, and almost all the eccentricity of her father ; living entirely among clever men, and left to educate herself as it pleased Cod. She was at once the most naïve and clever little creature in the world. When the Duke first discovered her at the foot of her father’s easel she was a mere child, but amazingly droll and out of the way, and quite a thing to captivate the worn-out taste of a man who was blase sur tout : so he began to try the effect of his sexagenaryj charms on the heart of the naïve Lolotte ; for that was her father’s nom de caresse for her: and Lolotte, as she has since told me, was charmed with the old beau’s wit, humor, and pleasantry; for all that he had.— But to come to the catastrophe :	Alter	trifling	at O’Hal-

loran’s easel for two or three years.

'here the daughter used to assist in lling up parts of the father’s pictures, îe enamoured Duke found an oppor-jnity of making his iittie proposal, nd of offering her a carte-blanche, and separate establishment, that should vai his old Duchess’s,who was playing way the remnant of her life over a ard-table in Bath. Lolotte neither jok this offer en heroine, nor in good art; for neither won nor irritated, it nly made her laugh, ready to die; nd she gave the old Duke some good ilvice, which, if he had taken, she rould not now have been Duchess of elmont. But he did not take it. More i love than ever, from the obstacles e encountered, he persevered ; he per~ anted, he prayed; he threatened ; and -olotte was reduced to the necessity ' confessing all to her father, from horn she had hitherto concealed it am motives of solicitude and tender-?ss ; for she had a sort of adoration

for this eccentric father, which was quite extraordinary.

“ Well, this Irish Apelles, a mere red-hot O’Trigger in points of honor, and all that sort of feeling, turned the old enamorato out of his work-room, made a most frightful esclandre of the whole affair, and drew so ridiculous a caricature of the Duke, as a Silenus pursuing a nymph, that the Duke left Florence and returned to England; and in a year or two after, OTIailoran died in great distress, leaving his daughter quite unprovided for. Her talents, however, could not fail to insure her subsistence, and she entered into the family of Sir Harry Hewson (then Envoy at Florence), as governess to his daughter. 1 am afraid she rather quizzed ^	poor	Lady Hewson, who happens to

be irresistibly ridiculous; for they sent her off the moment she had done with their daughter, though quite destitute in England ; and she then fell to the

share of Lady Singleton, with whom I dare say she was uncomfortable enough; for though Lady Singleton is an excellent and well-meaning woman, and happens at this moment to be the most in my confidence, of any one whatever, yet her little weakness (and who is without their little weakness)3 is to be the personage in every thing; the beginning and end of all: so poor Lola tie* s naïveté, and acuteness, and talents, went for nothing; and she was thrown twenty fathoms deep into the shade. Mr. Glentworth, who was a most worthy

man------5J

ff He was, indeed, interrupted O’Donnel, emphatically, “ a most superior man.”

ec Well, Colonel, this excellent Mr. Glentworth did much to soften the situation of the little gouvernante ; and when he died, she would remain no longer in the family : and hating the line of life altogether, she began once

L 3

more to cultivate her talents for painting, and set up as a portrait painter. Meantime the old Duke had lost his old Duchess, and for want of something else to do, placed himself at the head of the English cognoscenti, to whom he was the law and the prophet: for having given up originals, he now devoted his time exclusively to pictures, and was seen poking his head into every exhibition in London. In one of these he discovered a pendant to an unfinished picture of O’Halloran’s, which he had in his collection, and which he greatly prized. He learned from the ciceroni of the place, that the picture had been partly done by OTIal-loran, and finished by his daughter, who was then painting in London. This was quite a sensation for the old Duke. He purchased the picture, and sent to the fair artist to know if she would finish the companion to it, which lie had in his gallery, offering a

liberal sum for the price of her labor. Lolotte was too poor to refuse the offer, too prudent to feel any other sentiment than pity for the old disappointed Da-mon; and too devoted to her father’s fame and memory, to suffer his work to fall into the hands of persons who knew nothing of his peculiar style, or prima intenzione, she consented to finish the picture, and before it was finished, she was Duchess of Belmont.

“ Well, the event made a great noise for a week or ten days ; and then the Duchess of Belmont went on, toute comme une autre. The Duke, however, bad been a valetudinarian for some years, and she was little more than his nurse during the few months .which he lived after their marriage ; and either to vex his nephews, whom die hated as men sometimes will hate their heirs, or to reward her attention to him, he left her every thing he possessed wiintailecl.	She got through

her widowhood with great decency; that is, she kept out of the bustle of last spring, and only saw a select society at home : but she is amazingly the fashion, and will be followed next season beyond every thing. She only threw off her weeds yesterday; and, according to a promise made me long since, she has given me the prémices of her gay colours and intentions to-day. Besides, however, being extremely glad to have the pleasure of her company, 1 was anxious she should meet the Savi 11 party, who have all rat her set their faces against her; the Duke, because Lord Charles has a prejudice against her; and Lady Mary, because her noble blood rises against the plebeian alliance; for she is doubly connected with the Sa-vi Ils, in her own person and by marriage: but the true secret of her Ladyship’s aversion is, that the Duchess has more wit than herself, though perhaps less reading ; and still more, that the Ge-

with the Duchess ; which., to do his liberal feelings justice, he is with whatever comes out last in the season. Now this is a kind of folly that I make a point to set mÿ face against: for, as the Duchess says, ‘ When a woman com-'pletely finds a man out, to go on jealous for lustrums from five, to ten, to fifteen, to twenty years, O then she should meet no quarter* for she deserves none/ However, I think I am pretty certain 1 shall bring Lord Charles over to the Duchess’s side, though he is now the most inveterate; and then all the rest will follow of course, for he is the leader

And pray, Madam,” said Colone. O’Donnel, extremely amused with this brief chronicle of her Graced history, “ how does the Duchess wear her new honors ? Do they already cling gracefully to her, without the aid of use ?°

“ O ! very fair indeed,” said Lady Llanberis ; “ a little odd now

r

then, and upon some occasions shews up a want of tact, and perhaps on the whole is not quite post enough for a woman of fashion; but all that will come in time, and the worst of it is— that it will come, and then she will be as dull and quiet as if she was born a Duchess, and not the least amusing.0

f£ And how did Lady Singleton take this extraordinary event ?° asked CVDonnel.

“ Why she was bored to death by it; first, because she did not intriguer the

*	O

thing herself; next, because the Duchess takes precedence of her; and above all, because she never discovered, •during their acquaintance, that Miss O’ilallorau was any thing but a Becky. Indeed, she persists still in throwing out some hints that the Duchess is the least in the world bêle ; and that people will find it out, sooner or later; meantime she affects to patronize her ; treats her with great condescension,

gives lier a hint what to do or say in great societies, and tells people they must assist her in bringing forward her parvenu Duchess, her good Lolotle, who conducted herself with the most perfect propriety when she was governess to her daughters, though fit for any thing but a governess, poor thing/*

44 Well, I confess,” said O’DonneJ, 44 I was almost as deficient in penetration with respect to her Grace’s merits as Lady Singleton, during the short time I was accidentally thrown into her society.”

44 Very true,” said Lady Llanberis: “ she was with Lady Singleton in Ireland, when they had that delightful adventure in the mountains, and discovered your romantic retreat. iAou cannot imagine how struck she was when she saw you here : I am sure it brought her former uncomfortable situation to her mind/’

44 I am sorry,” he returned, “ I

should form a link in a chain of such melancholy association.”

“ It is quite over,” said the Countess, “ and we have been laughing- this

O	O

hour back at Lady Mary ; but pray tell me what you thought of the future Duchess when she was Lady S—’s governess? Did you not think her pretty ?”

“ Scarcely/’ returned O’Donne]. “ I thought her a Goody-two-Shoes looking person; for her figure, which was not a Sylph’s, though the old Duke’s might have been aSilenus, owed very little to her dress; and herface was so concealed by her deep bonnet, I did not get a very perfect view of it ; however, she was a • true Isis, worthy the mysterious motto of £ 1 am what I am/ and reserving the elevation of her mystic veil for no hand but her own/’

Here the entrance of the supper trays reminded Lady Llanberis of her assignation in the dressing-room, and she

arose to go, when, with a sudden recollection, she turned back,, and said to O’Donnel :

“ Colonel O’Donnel, I have a great deal to say to you that relates only to yourself: will you walk with me in the grounds to-morrow, after breakfast, and I will endeavour to keep myself disengaged ?”

O’Donnel, on the very tiptoe of expectation by this speech, bowed his acceptance of the flattering proposal.

“ But,” continued the Countess,

“ tell me how long you can assure me

the pleasure of your company—re--

member the longer the better; but-I

have a particular reason for wishing

that you will allow me to reckon on

vou for three weeks or a month at •/

least: come/’ she continued, observing his hesitation, and with a smile full of irresistible persuasion, “ you must, you shalb promise me : I have some views in your favor which cannot be realized

before that time. Consider, three weeks—what are three weeks? three minutes?*

“ Passed here,” returned O’Donnel, bowing: <c but out of Alcitui s Palace three weeks will go into the common account of time, and when duty calls for the reckoning---”

“ Why then send her to me,5’ she replied, laughingly, “ and I will settle with her; so remember, for three weeks at least, the gates of Alcinas Palace are shut on you.”

And she glided gaily away, leaving CPDonnel charmed with her kind and cordial manner, and more than ever convinced that I his powerful, thoughtless, and heart-whole woman, was indeed his concealed benefactress.

CHAPTER 17

The next morning Colonel O’Don-nel descended to breakfast, hoping to find his noble hostess, and to get an opportunity of reminding her of the promised walk : but a few only of the party were assembled, and the Countess was not among the number. Adjoining-th? breakfast-room was a kind of bar, where breakfast was prepared and served according to orders ; and among the trays sent to different dressing-rooms, he perceived that one was carried by the Countess’s page, arid the other was sent to the Duchess of Belmont. Giving up all hope, therefore, of seeing Lady Llanberis for some time, O’Donnel breakfasted; and after a little conversation with General Sa-vill, a good-humoured gentlemanly

man, whose manners retained a tinge of the vieille-cour, he went to the book room, and had employed himself more than an hour in looking over some political pamphlets, when he caught the sound of Lady Llanberis’s shrill clear voice in the adjoining billiard-room.

To the billiard-room he immediately went, and found the whole party assembled. Lady Llanberis either did not notice his entrance, or was too much engrossed to mark that she did, for she was deeply,, exclusively, engaged in taking a lesson in billiards from General Savill: all energy, all eagerness, her life seemed staked on the game, which Lord Charles, her opponent, was playing with the utmost languor and listlessness, smiling at her ardour, and amused by her anxiety, while every ball she pocketted was not only applauded loudly by herself, but followed by the echo of brava! from nearly all the rest of the company.

The simple Sir Gilbert, who was playing cup and ball, betted desperately on her side against Mr. Carlisle ; while? apart from the group assembled round the billiard-table, his listless length stretched on a Grecian scroll, and a _ book half open in his hand, lay the Duke of Belmont, talking, or rather listening to his Dowager aunt, who sat a little in advance before him, on a low tabouretydvawing viewless figures on the carpet with the end of a billiard mace.

By the gradual brightening of his countenance, the Duke seemed to yield himself up to the pleasantry of her conversation, for she was talking with much animation, and he was listening with a smiling attention. There was in the look, position, and gesture of this metamorpiiosised person, such an alteration of gaiety and thoughtfulness, of deep reverie and spirited vivacity, that O’Donnel in vain sought for the former “ Goodv-two-Shoes’' in

the Sybil, the Pythoness, that now fascinated his gaze, lie could understand that lier figure, which was round and picquante, but not of the svlphid slightness on which drapery could be disposed with advantage, had lost by being clumsily muffled, and that her well-turned head had gained, by the absence of the dowdy bonnet, which had also shaded her fine eves; yet still he found it difficult, even with the most scrupulous examination, to trace the unattractive Miss O’Malloran in the attractive Duchess of Belmont.

Her eyes and her smile were singu-larlyfine: her eyes when thrown down, threw large dilated orbs starting b vend the full and heavy lid, and gleaming through their long dark lashes, had a melancholy wildness in their expression, too often the character of overwrought genius, or high-wound sensibility; when suddenly thrown upwards, there was $ flashing brightness

in their expression which marked a great rapidity and quickness of thought and of feeling ; when fixed on vacancy, they had all the stupor of Miss O’Hal-îoran’s heavy look: her smile,-playfully brilliant, was at times too acute to be contemplated without exciting a fear of the spirit from whence it drew its arch intelligence. But her countenance, when at rest, exhibited no -expression to give assurance of such a mind as beamed in her eye or animated her smile.

The science of physiognomy, as it Bore merely upon structure, O’Donnel considered as the dream of imagina-

O

tion ; but though he did not think a nose could indicate passion, or a mouth express genius, by their form jdone, he yet had confidence in those external indices of the moral character which may be sought in the play and change of countenance.

He was therefore struck by the

variety and transition of expression which flitted across the face he now contemplated ; and though he could still trace there Miss O’Halloran’s features, yet he was puzzled to guess what magic had lent them the soul by which they were now animated. Was it love? was it vanity ? was it the influence of rank, fortune, and fashion, and conscious power, and high consideration ; or was it all acting, all “ false seeming ?” But in this case, which was

O	J

the actress, the governess, or the Duchess; or was there some third character, superior to both, and which assumed and discarded either, according to the circumstances and exigency of the moment. From Lady Llanberis’s description of her he drew no opinion, for it all come to this—that she amused her, but so did Mr. Dexter.

While he was thus endeavoring to get at the character here <e wrapt up in countenance,*'* the Duchess suddenly

lurnea rouna ner neaci, ana met ^at least he thought she met) his eyes ; but she averted her head so quickly, that it left the matter doubtful, whether she really did or did not see him. In a few minutes afterwards she looked at him and bowed slightly. O’Donnel, however, thought this bow, together with her conversation the last nicrht

O

with Lady Llanberis, authorized, or rather called on him to advance and pay his respects; and yet with the timidity of pride, always apprehensive of self-commitment, lie was slowly and even reluctantly approaching her, when he observed her conversing so earnestly with the Duke, that he conceived his addressing her now would be nothing short of intrusion ; and he stood near the tabouret on which she sat, mortified that he had advanced so far, and meditating a retreat, when he was suddenly transfixed to the spot by the unexpected appearance of Me. Rory's head

thrust through the folding doors of the room: with a brogue more than usually broad, he cried out : — ct Is the master here?”

This extraordinary head, voice, and inquiry, attracted an instantaneous and universal attention, and was followed by a general burst of laughter.

“ I ax pardon,humbly cried Me. Rory, as he advanced beyond the door, and took off his hat : fC but I’d just be glad to spake a word to the master if he's in the place.5'

“ Who is your master, Pat?*' asked Mr. Carlisle, holding his sides.

“ The Colonel is, your Honor; Colonel O’Donnel,'5 returned Me. Rory, with his eyes following a billiard ball that was rolling now unheeded into one of the pockets.

O’Donnel, mortified, irritated, and annoyed, beyond all endurance, and unprepared by previous feelings to

rtonrl tkn Krnnh r\ r trio er»nmj u; nirn m &

guessed would naturally ensue, was

shrinking back on the first impulse

of his feelings towards the shelter of

a large screen, behind which a door

stood half open, when he was arrested

by a hand, a voice, and the words,

“ courage, or you are lost/' It was

the same hand, the same voice which

had arrested his steps at Carrick-a-rede.

All this had passed with the rapidity of

ligJttiling; and Me. Rory having now

caught a sight of his master, coolly

shut the door bv which he had enter-%/

ed, and advancing with his hat and shilclagh in one hand, and dragging the other along the rim of the billiard-

\ Q

table, he addressed O’Donnel with: — I just made bould to step in, Colonel, to be after mintioning to your

Honor, that------”

“ I will speak to you in the antiroom,said O’Donnel, with a smiling composure, which did honor to the Duchess’s inspiration; and motioned

to iVic. Jttory to leave tne apartment ; who turned back, crvina: :

“ O, very well, Sir; that will do every bit as well.”

66 No, no, pray, Colonel, speak to him here,” said Lady Llanberis, throwing down her billiard cue in the middle ■of the game, which had so deeply engrossed her a moment before : “ I dare say this is a most entertaining person : if you have nothing particular to say to him, Colonel O’Donnel, pray let him speak to you here.”

Me. Rory turned round, and made her a low bow, which, whether humorous or not, had all the effect of being so, on the risible muscles of his spectators.

O'Donnel threw round a quick glance, to observe if among the men one smile was transferred from the servant to the master, with a feeling at the moment which would have rendered it a desi- -rable event, to have had some excuse

ever, no smile, no eye was directed; Me. Rory was the lion of the moment, and occupied a place which heroes, .orators, actors, jugglers, ministers, and dancing-dogs, had all in succession oc* .cupied before. The interest which his appearance and his brogue had excited, was considerably increased by his bow, and when Lady Lianberis repeated, *'c He is, 1 (Lire say, a particularly amusing person, and 1 beg lie may not be sent away,” he replied with another bow, more profound than the former: c: 1 am entirely obliged to you. Madam, for your civility ; troth, I am; and 1 humbly ax pardon of the quality for making so bould as to come in among them ; but 1 just stepped in to tell the master i must quit the place, for I would‘nt stay in it, go-at as it is, if they made me Provost of Belfast, in regard of the uncommon affronts put upon me, Madam.^

VOL. II.	M

ec Indeed !” said Lady Llanberis, 6r then pray inform me who has offended you, for I am the person to apply to, you may depend on it.5'

“ Oh ! no, Madam, if you plase, I will not; for if I turned informer, I’d be the first of my family, kin, kind, or relation, that ever turned that same, any how ; but axing your Ladyship’s pardon, humbly, might I inquire if you are the mistress3 Madam ?”

“ Oh, yes/5 said Lady Llanberis, joining the now subdued but still ge-* neral laugh ; “ 1 am the only mistress here.”

“ Why then, troth, a beautiful fine lady you are, God bless you, and long may you reign, I pray God. And a poor set of cratnrs you have under you, any how, as ever broke the bread of life ; and many a great house I was in, though never none as great as this, barring Oubli)! College, and the Castie-vard : and devil of the likes of such

of being no wise agreeable, but remarkably the contrary; and so with your Honor’s lave. Sir, I’d rather quit the place intirely, and keep with Bran, the baste, ’till vour Honor comes back to

7	*j

us—God bless vou.”

ct No, no, said Lady Llanberis, earnestly, “ you must not go, by any means. 1 invite you to stay here, and I insist on knowing in what manner you have been offended.”

“ No offence in life, mv Ladv,” re-

4	V	*.*	7

turned Me. llory, bowing low, “ only that 1 have got the worst of usage : from the moment I crossed the threshold to this blessed hour, as I may say : for sure, Madam, I had’nfstepped out of the iV Citai/, and just put my foot in the entry, when I sees them all sneering and jogging each other; and when the master was shewed into the parlor, did’nt they gather round me, as if I

M 2

was one of the seven wonders ? and kept axing me what outlandish gentleman I was; and where I Icepi when I was at home: but myself did’ntcare to be answering them, in respect of not knowing the ways of the place ; only 1 feaw thecralurs had no manners at all at all : and so I took up the portmantle to the master’s room, and laid his things out for a change, and then I thought I'd just step down to the kitchen and take an air of the Jire; and so away 1 goes down litis lobby, and up that lobby, and crasses this entry, and passes that, until I comes to the kitchen, sure enough ; and an elegant fine kitchen it is, any way ; and the greatest of plinty there is in it, surely: i don’t know, my Lady., did ever you see the Col-lene kitchen? well, troth, I would'nt know this same trom it, if I was blindfold— -but I had’ut gone the length of myself, iViauam, in it, when a gar-

high* of a lad comes up to me, in a clcnic. white apron, and says he to me : ; This here place is no place for you, my good feller, and so you must not stay here no longer.”

A General lauMi at Me. Rory’s at^

*	Zs	i

temj)ted imitation of the English accent, and Cockney dialect, now inter-nipted the narration; and O’DonneJ still fearing to share the ridicule of the moment, half augrv, and yet almost amused, was again tempted to put an end to the absurd scene, when llie eye of the Duchess fixed him, and her up-' lifted finger, raised in token of command, operated like a spell on his faculties; he smiled, and remained motionless.

Meantime Me. Rory, elated by the attention he commanded, and tiie applause he received, joined in ..rîily iri

* 11 Garlagh.” ttasc.born; a term of coa-bmnf.

•	^	v	JU XU I

the laugh he supposed he had raised, against the cook's apprentice ; and to Mr. Carlisle’s assurance that nothing could be better than his imitation, he replied :

“ Why then, troth, Sir, if we had*ni better English lban that, at the other .side of the Shannon3 our schoolmeasters-ought to he inditedW

“ But go on/' cried Lady Llanberis, impatiently. “ Pray, Mr. Carlisle', don’t interrupt him. île is quite as good as Irish Johnstone-—Weih Sir?’'

“ Well, my Lady—c Stay here ?io longer/ says he; them were his words: but 1 thought him i n tire! y h c n a lit e m e ; and I kept on, never minding, only-looking at a bit of a cola/* that was running round, and round, in a wheel,' by the hob, as if the devil was after th* animal: Gad pardon me for saying so! when a leprighaun’)* of a cratur, in

* Colcv.—The general name for a little black tlocr,	fSce	note	ciul	of	the	volume.

a white night-cap, who was standing in a kind of a sort of a pulpit, jabbering for all the world like a monkey on the top of a shew-box, keeps crying to me/ f Vat you vaut here ? de kitchen be no place for cle sarvant/ Is it the kitchen no place for sarvanfs ?* says I, looking up at him: 4 O, be aisy, MonnseerJ says 1: 4 Is it to tlie parlor you’d have us g-o?*	4 Get you gone; go, go,5

says he, for all the world as if I was à dog.4 Wei I, see here, Mounseer,’ says I, clinching my crubeen* at him—but somehow the heart sunk within me: not but I could have crush’d the poor cratur between my finger and thumb. But of a suddent I got such an all-overness upon me, you would’nt give a halfpenny for me, my Lady; for I thought of my own poor old country, where the kitchen door was never shut in the stranger’s face yet, and where

\ - - t -~m - -   ,r- '	 ,	  r-j	T1	'	’	' *.*

* Fist.

the best potatoe in the pot. and the best seat at the hob, was never denied him: and so, Madam, I turn’d quietly away, not choosing, just for pride sake, to let them see that the eyes of me were as full as the heart—and troth, and that was full enough.—I quit the place sad and sorrowful, Ochone W

44 Poor man !” cried Lady Llanberis, with a voice and countenance of unaffected sympathy, 44 Poor man !—Well, and where did vou go to?”

44 Well, in y Lady, so I went groping about in the passage, for it was beginning to get dark ; and finding an elegant fine fire in a room off my right, I turns in, and seeing it was quite impty, in regard of nobody being in it, 1 sates

O	■/	w

myself at the fire ; and the head being heavy, and the heart full, ] fell asleep, and would’nt have waken’d till th*end of time, only for the hunger, and the smell of the male: for when 1 opened

my eyes, my Lady, it was just all as one as if the faries had done it, Madam, for an uncommon fine supper there was. surely, spread before me, and remarkable handsome to be sure I thought it of them. Lut, Madam, before 1 had helped myself to a cut of million and a potatoc, out there comes from behind a sort of a skreen, the very .moral of that same near the master there, as elegant a party of (juality as any her to the fore; and devil of such laughing and giggling ever i heard ; only one of the gentlemen snatches the knife out of

my hand, and bids me quit.-----4 For/

says lie, 4 though this is a tcastly good joke, my good feller, yet you must go; for the leedies and gentlemen of the Steward’s room do./t admit livery sar-vants to their table. Here,’ says he, calling to a gnssoon who stood grin-

O	C	O

ning at the bullet, f Thomas, shew this here person to the hall.’—4 For what should he shew me to the hall,

Sir?' says I. 4 Was’nt I and my master ax’d here, to put over the Christmas?’ 4 There is no use in argufying/ says the gentleman : 4 you cawni stay here, my good man ; and if you are not willing to go out of this here door, I shall take the liberty of sending you out of that there vinder.* 5 You will/ says 3.	4	I	will,	’porr

my word/ says he. 4 Well, well/ says I, 4 it’s a folly to talk any more ; but it’s my real and undoubted opinion, that there is not a bone in your ugly carcase but ought to be broken fairly ; and I, Phaidrig Me. Rory, am just the boy to do it; and,, in regard of sending me out of the window, dear, only let me see the gentleman among ye’z that says lied be the man to attempt that same, and ill engage 1*11 lay my mark

on him, which he would carry to his

' */

grave if he lived these thousand years : upon that, Madam, the leedies and the .faymales sets up a thousand numbers;

says they: O, how frightful we are!” added Me. Rory, with an arch smile of self-complacency, and throwing his eyes from his own figure to his masters ; while a general laugh followed the observation and the look. Lady Llanberis alone did not join the merriment of the moment, but exclaimed with earnestness :

“ I really see nothing to laugh at: this poor man has been extremely ill-used, and I shall not let the business lie here: goon, Me. Rory.—Me. Rory is your name, you say ?”

“ O, it is, my Lady, in lieu of a better. Madam; so, without more to do, my Lady, seeing I did’at lave a word in their mouth—that’s in the gentlemens, I takes up my caubeen

* Caubeen—an old hat*

and i quits tne place lnnreiy, not care-ing to have any thing more to say to the likes of them ; and the gassoon, who was standing still at the buffet, kept running after me, and he ups and he tells me that the leedies and gentlemen bates the quality fairly in respect of being mighty high and conceited ; and he told me the servants5 hall was the place/br and that the bell had rung for the footmen’s supper, and the rest of the under sarvants ; and he shews me into the place very civilly ; and so I went in, and I made them a mannerly bow as / thought, and says I, c much good may do ye zd for they were afing ; upon which they sets up a laugh, but I drew a chair, and was going to trouble the fat gentlewoman at the head of the table for the iasle taste in life of any thin" was going-, when

*•	v'	Ou1'

a young man, all powdered and scented? with every stripe of gold on his

v»*iptî lut; UlÇdUlll U1 Ilij llcUJUj biepS

up to me, and says he :	4	In what

capacity to you sarve ?’ 6 In every capacity in life,5 says I. 4 You do/ says he. f O, I do/ says I, surely. 4 Then you look after your master’s horses,’ says he. 4 Is it.himself you’d have look after them/ says I; and I made him that same answer for a raison I had. r Why then/ says he: 4 you must go to the out-offices, for the outdoor sarvants does’nt ate in the hall, for we vote the smell of the stable a bore/ 4 Ye’z may wote it what ye’z plase/ says I : 4 Arrah ! hut the devil bore me if I move a foot out of this till I finishes my bit, and the first man among ye’z that lays a finger on me, (barring it’s a faymale) by the crass i’ll not lave a whole bone in his skin / with that, my Lady, they ail set up a laugh you might hear from this to Uontfi, for they were hearty sowls as I

found after, and I ate my supper in pace, and never tould nothing to nobody of what had happened—that is to his Honor the Colonel, thinking there was no use in complaining, as he was a stranger in it himself, long life to him ! but this morning, my Lady, the master of the hotel as they call him, comes to me, and tells me all as one as that I must not take my mails in the sarvants* hall in respect of the head footman having tould him 1 was only an out-door sarvant, so seeing the uncommon affronts that was put upon me, I thought I would just get lave of his Honor to quit the place intirely, though it’s little 1 guessed it wouidcome

O	D

to that this morning, for no later nor last night 3^0u would think they never could make enough of me in the sauvants' hall ; for when the heart of me begun to warm after supper, and 1 sung

t

them a real good ou Id Irish plahxty,

tner the dollar; tor tne young fay-males,, who were far more agreeable in my mind than the leedies in the steward’s room, they took to me great* ly, the craturs !”

By an instantaneous transition of feeling, Lady Llanberis’s countenance changed from an expression of pity to a look of the most vivacious eagerness.

f£ Then, Me. Rory/’ she said, f£ you must sing the Irish planxty for us this moment, and dance the step that cost your mother the dollar: but first you must have some refreshment. Sir Gilbert, do go into the anti-room and order some Madeira and water here, and now let us make a little room. Mr. Carlisle,, you understand these things : pray make a clearance. General, do put aside that skreen. My dear Duke, gather up your eternal legs; so now we are ali attention : O ! here is the wine and water: and now, Me. Rory,

you shall drink (o my health, and then we’ll have the song first and the dance after, for I long to see an Irish jig. It is not for me/’ she said to the maître d’hotel, who approached with a salver with wine and water:	it	is

for that person/' pointing to Me. Rory.

The maître d’hote], without the least symptom either of surprize or mortification from the service imposed on him,, poured out some Madeira, and was about to add the water, when Me Rory checked his hand, crying,

“ O ! no, Sir, many thanks to you,' I’d rather the wine: Tin no wise particular.93

And bowing humbly to Lady Liau-beris, he said :

“ Here’s long life to your Ladyship, and long may you reign, and may the sun that rises on you every morning find you happier than the day before, though you live for a thousand years, and that you may, i pray God, amen.”

Then bowing to the rest of the company, he drank off his wine.

tf Thank you, thank you, Me. Bory,^ cried Lady Llanberis: “ And now come, we must have the song: I dare say it is out and out a better thing than one hears on the stage—come, Me. Rorv, begin.”

Me. Rory did not immediately obey, in spite of her Ladyship’s impatience, or that testified by the rest of the company : he stood in the centre of the circle, moulding his hat and twirling his Stick in every possible way, still in the midst of his triumph and exaltation of spirits, directing his looks to his master with an expression of shyness and apprehension.

A Certainly,’’ said O’Donuel, nodding It is head to him, and knowing opposition was now vain : “ Certainly, Me. Rory, obey any commands her Ladyship may please to honor you with.”

“ Thank you, Colonel/’ said Lady Llanberis, advancing and offering him her hand : 4f I must say I am very fortunate to have made the pleasure of your acquaintance, and your Irish servant is by much the most am using person I ever met with in his way ; and now we are all attention, Me. Rory.”

44 111 just humor the tune a little, my Lady/’ said Me. Rory, imitating the movements of a piper on his stick, and running over a sort of wild prelude with his voice, abruptly pausing to ask:

44 I don’t know, my Lady, if ever you heard a bit of a planxt}7, called Plae Raca naRuarc; or O’Rorkes Noble Feast ?”’*

44 Never, never/’ said Lady Llanberis impatiently.

44 Well, it goes mighty well, Ma-

* Sec note end of the volume.

$am. I’ll just give it to vou in Irish

\	•>	O	w

first, mv Lady.’'

I in Irish by all means,3’ returned Lady Llanberis eagerly.

Me. Rory then began one of the most spirited compositions which the genius of his countryman, Carolan* has prod need, and to the tones of a deep clear voice he added such extraordinary rapidity of articulation, and such an inimitable humor of countenance and manner, as to excite not only a general applause, but almost as general a sympathy, as if the language in which he sung had been understood by his auditors; and, amidst their bravos and bravissimos, he concluded his song with a scrape and a bow.

And now, mv Ladv/’ he said^

J	4/	J	*

would you like to have that same in English.”

Not now, not now, thank you, Me. Rory,” cried Lady Llanberis, yawning: “ Come, this has all been

very good, indeed, and will do very

well for the present; so we will not

detain you any longer, thank you,

thank vou.*’

%)

]Nle. Rory, evidently amazed by this unexpected dismissal, with a look of mortification proportioned to his previous exhilaration, 'hastily snatched up his hat, and was hurrying out of the room with a hastv bow, whnn the Duchess, springing forward, took Lady Llanberis’s hand, arid with a countenance, whose archness and irony gave great effect to the mock vehemence and affected gravity of her manner, she exclaimed :

“ O, Lady Llanheris, is it thus you protect merit in distress ? is it thus you dismiss from your presence the liberal contributor to your morning amusements—the ad m i rah ! e Crcigh ton of the day ? Is it like your usual liberality and justice to send him from your presence with all his talents un-

rewarded, ana all his wrongs unreel ressed ?”

4‘ Certainly not, Duchess,” returned Lady Llanberis, evidently worked on by her Grace’s appeal: 4‘ Certainly not; but what can be done?—However, ring the bell, General. Mr. Mussen, pray, call back Me. Rory, and send for the maître d’hote] ; and I will at least try what is to be done. Come in, Me. Rory.”

And a moment after, the maître tr hotel appeared.

1,4 O, Saunders, I wish to mention to you that 1 think you and the rest of the people in the steward’s room have behaved most particularly ill to a very respectable and a very amusing man/*

Saunders bowed low, but made no

- /

answer.

44 And I really do not chuse to have any person whatever made uncomfortable in my house, and least of all such a person as Colonel 0’Doünel’s aer-

vant, whom yon have all 1 find used most scandalously.”

“ Beg pardon, my Lady,’1 bowed Mr. Saunders, submissively: “but it would be against the rules, and against your Ladyship’s own orders, to admit a liverv servant into the steward’s */

room upon any pretence whatever, my Ladv.”

“ Yes, my orders ! but I am not talking of my orders, Mr. Saunders; and 1 must say, that I have no idea of such airs as the upper servants sometimes give themselves: they are quite too ridiculous, particularly in the instance of the person in question, who happens to be much more amusing than all my establishment put together* and much more clever in every sense; for he has a pretty opinion of you all,

I can tell you, and has shewn you all up completely ; besides, Mr. Saunders,

I druse to be obeyed, and not argued with.’'

J\Ir. Saunders bowed again more obsequiously than before.

“ And I desire that Colonel O’Don-nel's servant maybe most particularly

attended to, and made as comfortable

\

as possible ; and since the Ladies in the stewards room find him such a frightful Irishman, and are too fine to admit the Colonel's servant to theiç particular society, he shall dine with my page, and I desire a cover may be laid in Florio's room for him to-day."

Certainly, my Lady."

“ And—but stay; send the butler to me in the anti-room: I will give orders mvself, and then there can be ~ no mistake."

And she hurried away, followed by the maître d’hotel, bowing and scraping, and by Me. Rory crying at every step :—

“ Fm intirely obliged to you, iny Lady; don't trouble yourself, Madam."

A few general observations on Me.

Rory, a few questions relative to hi* character, asked of O’Donnel, and an attempted imitation of his brogue and manner by Mr. Carlisle, exhausted the subject, and the party broke up, dispersing different ways alter the different pursuits by which they might contrive to hll up the time till dinner. The Duchess was the first to leave the room, which she did, humming a waltz, and taking no further notice of O’Donnel, who remained in the billiard*room the last of the party.

This conduct rather astonished than displeased him: he thought it extraordinary that a woman, who had assumed a command over him, which should belong only to the privilege of intimacy, or the empire of affection, should leave him without assigning any

Cj	C?	%/

further mark of notice or recognition: yet he felt that he would not much regret if this digressive sort of acquaintance were to drop here, for it waa associated

in nis mina less witn pleasure man with mortification : for in the only two instances in which, at the distance of two years, they had held any intercourse, she had assumed an air of protection over him so imposing, that it almost convinced himself he stood in need of it.

The time-piece over the billiard-room chimney-piece now struck two. There was still time for the promised walk with Lady Llanberis, in . which he trusted an opportunity would be afforded him of returning her munificent gift by her leading, herself, to the subject. He was crossing the book-room to seek her page, when he perceived the Duchess standing before a bookcase, holding a heavy volume, which dropt on the ground, as she started from the sudden clapping of the door, which had slipped out of O’Donnefs hand. He apologized for the abruptness of his entrance, and picked up the book,

VOL. II*	BT

pausing for a moment in the hope of finding something to say; not, however, particularly desiring it, but believing that it would be expected; yet when he raised his eyes, there was such an extraordinary expression of demureness in her countenance, that instead of encouraging, it confounded him. They both silently stood holding the ponderous volume between them for near a minute, when the Duchess letting go her hold, he placed it on a reading-desk which stood near, and asked if he could be of any further use to her.

“ Perhaps/' she said, 48 you can save me the trouble of looking through this voluminous German dictionary for half a dozen words that have puzzled me in reading Schiller’s Mary Queen of Scots/'

And she presented him a slip of paper, on which the German words wore written.

tion opposite to them with his pencil, observing as he wrote :	•

“ It is so long since I have had an opportunity of speaking German, that I almost forget the language.5*

ct Have you not been abroad,55 she asked, u since I had last the pleasure of seeing you on the shores of Lough Svvilly ?”

“ No, Madam, I have since then been leading a life, as it were3by stealth; and had not an unexpected necessity led me to England, I believe I should have grown to the rocks on which your Grace left me, and

u Forgot myself to stone,”

or turned parasite to the only tree that shaded my hut, and been confounded in the end with other vegetating things identified with its trunk/’

u Then I hope,” said the Duchess, v 3

J v liai ^ iv vt uuuv. v/i j wu i y>ui uoua

properties behind you, for you will find them of much more use here than in the wilds of Lough Swilly.'*

“ I hope. Madam,” said O’Donnel, quickly, and inferring more from her s ni le than her words, ct that your Grace speaks more for the sake of the figure tlian in belief of the fact.’’

“ O ! as to belief,” she returned carelessly, I believe nothing and deny nothing ; to doubt is my creed, and not to wonder my motto.”

“ This is the true doctrine of scepticism, indeed/’ said O’Donnel.

“ And the only doctrine that can be applied to all the paradoxes, incongruities, chances, changes, and follies of life,” she replied gaily.

cc And did you never profess any other, Madam ?” he asked with earnestness, endeavouring to read through her eyes the secret of her character.

r

‘f I at least did not profess any other when I first saw you on the rocks of Glen arm.”

« Indeed !”

It is quite true; I believe I was the only one of the party on which I hung—-I must not say to which I belonged, who were not’amazed to find a man of the world playing the part of a hermit, nor am I now surprised to see the hermit playing the part of the man of the world, nor the Philosopher of the Mountains quitting his beloved ; Savagery of Nature/ to launch on the summer seas of pleasure, and obsequiously follow in the wake of a first-rate woman of fashion.” O’Donnel, at once amazed and amused, yet scarcely knowing how to receive the irony couched under this vein of raillery, endeavoured to take her on her own tone, arid replied :—

“ You are quite-mistaken, Madam;

I do not belong to the service to which

your Grace aliudes: I am again indeed

put out to sea—but I am but a solitary

skiff, blown for a moment into the

halcyon track, where I now float, by

the elements of which I am the sport/

A solitary skiff!” repeated the

Duchess, with her sybil smile and

shaking her head. “ A privateer you

mean, Colonel, furnished with letters of

marque, sails crowded, colours flying*

and in full chase of a prize. But,” she

added pointedly, learn from an ex-

. perienced mariner that there blow no

trade-winds here, and though the ‘ dew

*

dropping south’ breathe to day, the shrill north-east may come and send you adrift to-morrow.’'

With these warning words,, emphatically pronounced, she was leaving the room, when suddenly turning back, she added :—

“ O! by the bye, ought I to apologize to you, or you offer acknowiedg-

merits to me, for my interference in the billiard-room ? But the fact is, I acted, as Lady Singleton would say, ‘ en femme qui connoitson monded Had you betray-edyour annoyance at Me. Rory’sabrupt appearance, 3^011 would have given the Mr. Carlisles a subject for mimicry, and the rest of the party no favorable impression of your tact; as it was, we have the laugh on oun side, for you know * I too am an Athenian.’ Me. Rory had, as I guessed he would, 4 mi grand.succès, and you had the amusing spectacle of seeing bon-ton frivolity exhibited in all its idleness and vacuity, without being in the least involved in the absurdities of your servant, who, after all, was far from being the most ridiculous personage in the scene.

G’Donnel thought his acknowledg-

/

ments were now so directly called for, that he was about to make them, but the Duchess, throwing up the sash of a window, near which she stood, told the N 4»

Miss Carlisles, who were walking with all the beaux under it, that she would join them in a minute, as soon as she could wrap herself up; and flew out of the room to execute the intention, and to seek a party, which, the moment before, had been the object of her derision, leaving O’Donnel overwhelmed in astonishment at all she had said, all she had looked, and all she had hinted at.

44 What an extraordinary creature V* he mentally observed ; 44 how kindly she has acted by me ; and yet how lightly she seems to think of me, still tendering me her protection, suspecting my weakness, and exhibiting her own strength ! To what can her mysterious words allude; or meaning nothing, does she speak in point, and talk in metaphor merely to shew off her wit, and sink the memory of Miss OTIalloraiTs dullness, in the vivacity of her Grace of Belmont? Brilliant she is; acute she

may be; and cold and vain she must be: for with discernment to detect, and talent to deride, folly, she yet evidently courts its suffrages, administers to its vanities, and has eagerly fled to join a group who was the moment before the object of her sarcasm and ridicule.

But enough of her : in a few davs this

O	*

parvenue Duchess will be to me what

the blunt governess was before, a thing

to hang upon the memory rather than

live in the recollection/’

O’Donnel then pursued his original

intention, and sent a servant to Lady

Llauberis to know if he should have

the honor of attending her in her walk;

° /

hut the man brought back an answer from her page that his Lady had driven out in her garden-chair, attended by the Duke and Lord Charles, and would not he home till dressing-time. O’Don-nel, therefore, gave up all chance of éclaircissement for that day; nor was the evening more propitious to his views,

for the Countess's whole attention wtrt devoted to the Mr. Carlisles, who struck up a sort of Ombres Chinoises, in which they were themselves to be the sole actors behind the illuminated sheet. The Miss Carlisles accompanied the spectacle on the harp and piano-forte, and Mr. Mussen was to recite Collins's Ode on the Passions between the acts. Lady Llanberis was amazingly delighted until she began to be amazingly weary; and before Mr. Mussen had finished, and love

Shook thousand odours from his dewy wing,”

she cried out with a stifled yawn,

“ Come, that’s very well—-that will do; and now let us have in supper; ] and then, Mr. Frederick Carlisle, you shall sing the “ Poor old Woman of Eighty," and send us all laughing to bed; for," with another stifled yawn,

I have been so amused,, that I am tired to death/5

CHAPTER 18

The following day being Sunday, and a very fine day, was devoted to the health of the souls and bodies of the guests of Longlands. Lady Llan-beris, who rather piqued herself upon being religious from time to time, was now in one of her pious crisis’s, from an accidental glance into the Methodist’s Magazine, which her maid was tearing up for papilotes, while . she dressed; and her Ladyship therefore insisted on every one accompanying her to church, except Colonel O’Donnel, to whom she sent word that there was a chapel within a few miles of Longlands. When church was over, the party drove to Lord J3.’s seat, to

look at an aviary which the Countess-intended as the model of one at Long-lands; and they only got back in time to dress for dinner.

O’Donnel spent the day alone, reading, writing, and wandering about the grounds. In the course of his ramble he came to an unfinished building in a dark fir grove, about a mile and a half distant from the house, and so encompassed by tree.s and underwood, that it was almost impossible to get at it. He at last, however^ made his way to a gate, which seemed the entrance; but above its arch was written in large letters,

No admission here.

O’Donnel drew back from the prohibited and mysterious edifice, and inquired of a man whom he met in his way back, what that building was.

The man replied, that though he was

ship and the master builder ; that the Countess was not pleased- when any body made inquiries about it; and that he believed not one of the quality in : «a	the	great house knew a word about it :

but for his part, he suspected it was intended for a chapel or a meetinghouse ; for they were putting up benches .> it	and	pews, though as yet he saw no sign

of a pulpit.

e;	O’Donnel	supposed	his	conjecture

was right, and resolved not to mention his accidental discovery to the fail foundress of this secluded temple. No) a little amused with this new trait in the variegated character of his whimsical and prodigal hostess, he returnee to the house, just as the empty carriages of the church party were driving from the hall door. r	A few of the neighboring gentry

enlarged the dinner part}7: the spirits of Lady Llanberis always increased with the number of her guests; and they were now in their fullest flow, when towards the end of the first course they received a sudden check, by perceiving that the Duchess was not nt table. Every term of wonder and astonishment was exhausted on the subject of this event by her Ladyship ; and servant after servant was dispatched with messages of inquiry to her Grace, before the first envoy could possibly return with an answer.

" When she desired to return after church,0 continued Lady Llanberis, 44 I thought it was because she hates sroina’ to see sights. I have seen her

o o

once or twice sit upon the steps of a skew-house, and quiz all those who went any further: but this looks as if she was ill, or.--”

Here the return of all the messengers in a body cut short the Countess’s

doubts and conjectures, which at all times she preferred to certainties and convictions. A groom of the chambers informed her Ladyship that the Duchess was very well, but that she had ordered a chicken in her dressing-r room, afid was so much engaged with a book, that she begged to be excused dining below.

Although it was a mere chance whe-ther Lady Llanberis had, or had not, remarked the absence of her whimsical guest ; yet having observed it, and at a moment when she wanted one of the Duchess’s 44 droll stories,’’ to bear out the exuberant flow of her own high spirits, she now found the cause assigned for absence inadequate to the disappointment it created; and all dis-appointments beirig of equal importance in the eyes of Lady Llanberis, as all crimes were of equal enormity in the opinion of the stoics, she nosv gave way to the influence of a sullen ill-humor,

which dimmed the lustre of her smile,

and hung like a stormv cloud on her

- %/

contracted brow.

“ Engaged in a book !—humph !” she repeated two or three times ; while Lord Charles smiled triumphantly, and Lady Mary, with a supercilious smile, repeated :

“ L* aimable capricieuse !"

“Well, that is just what she is/’said Lady Llanberis, her countenance suddenly brightening into animation, and roused by Lady Mary’s ironical attack on her absentfriend: for with one whom pleased to hold up,she did notchoose another should find fault: glad, too, to have an opportunity of venting her acrimonious feelings, she continued :

“ LJ aimable capricieuse is a very

fit name for her; and I must sav I

7 «/

prefer her little whims to the eternal

sameness of some people’s good sense

and dull uniformitv a thousand times

»

over.—Go, Willis, go to her Grace,

with my love, and that I am sorry we have riot the pleasure of her company, but tha.t she is quite right to do the thing she" likes best : and, Willis, request the Duchess to let me know what book she is reading.’*

The man obeyed, and her Ladyship continued :—1 daresay it is something very new or very amusing, orshe would not be so empresde about it. I would rather take a book of her recommendation than any one else whatever; she hits upon such very odd things.” Mr. Mussen observed, with the air of aman who had taken too much pains with the phrase and matter of his speech to doubt its success :—•

“ The Duchess is indeed very unique in all her views of things. She may be likened to one of those meteoric bodies, bright but eccentric, whose course it is so difficult to follow, and whose aphelion it is scarcely possible to guess at.’’

“ Is not Mr. Mussen very eloquent Vy asked Lady Mary, in a whisper, of Lady Llanberis.

“ I don’t think so at all,” returned the Countess, abruptly.

“ You did think so once/’ returned Lady Mary, in a tone of pique.

“ Yes, once, Lady Mary, perhaps; but one cannot really go on thinking the same thing for ever/’

Here Willis returned, and laid a slip of paper before his lady, who read aloud—ft Le Fere Pascal/’

Every body present, who knew any thing of the author or ' the reader, smiled : Mr. Mussen ironically, because Lady Mary smiled ironically; and Mr. Wharton sneered maliciously as double to Lord Charles.

“ Le Pere Pascal is not exactlv the book I should expect to find in her Grace’s hands,” said Lady Mary.

“ O, you mistake her, quite then/' returned Lady Llanberis, “ for though

I understand her father, like the late poor Duke, was a very free-thinking, unhappy man, yet she is extremely proper on such subjects, and her devoting Sunday to Pascal is not at ail unlike her; by the bye, I must get her to order me down some copies of Pascal : one should always have such books in the way ; but since good Dr. Sandford, my son’s late tutor, and now an Irish bishop, ieft us, we have been sadly off in these particuiars.—Apropos, Mr. Mussen, I hope you did not order that stupid work upon “organs,” you were mentioning; if you did, pray recall vour orders : there is no use in throw-ing away money upon such stuff, when one has not a Pascal in the house. Indeed, while I think of it, I’ll send to the Duchess to make a memorandum of it. Willis, bring me a bit of note-paper.” While she wrote her request with a pencil, Mr. Mussen kept assuring her

that hcr change of opinion wa3 unfortunately too late, for that three copies of4' Gall" were on the road. Meantime her Ladyship, wholely intent on her note, heard him not, and wrote during nearly the whole of the second course : she then twisted up the paper in curious folds, and dispatched it. Mr. Mus-sen, admiring the ingenuity with which the paper was twisted, entered on a discussion on note and letter folding ; observing, that he was engaged in a poem called the Billet,5’ which brought down the history of note and letter-writing from the days of Cicero tothose of Miss Elizabeth Carter; in which he gave not only specimens of the various styles of celebrated epistolary writers, but fac-similies of all the modes of folding letters; with an historical treatise on stationery, the introduction of note-paper, device borders, French mottos, &c. &c. &c.

i lie v^uunicbs was ueiigiiieu wuu ms plan ; begged he would put her down in his subscription list for twenty copies ; and no less charmed with a concetto he hit off for the head of notes of mere compliments of inquiry, she requested he would order ten or a dozen reams. cr Observe, Mr. Mussen/’ she repeated,

1 do not say quires, but reams ;—quantities of reams.1 ’

During the whole of these discussions, O’Donnel had preserved an unbroken silence ; involuntarily meditating on the character of the whimsical Duchess, who had either from genuine inconsequence, or affected eccentricity, made herself the subject of malignant animadversion and ridiculous-conjectures. The sullen, subdued, unobtrusive Miss OTialloran would oppose herself in his mind to this “ sc orner of opinion but whether the vain ambition of singularity lay at the bottom of all this ; or whether, understanding the

cnaracters among winch she was involved, she was merely u fooling them up to their bent,” he was unable to decide.

When the gentlemen adjourned to the drawing-room, they found the ladies ~ all thickly grouped round one of the fire-places, and, not as usual, broken into little sets, or parted into lëte-à-tëies% The tie which connected them was an argument which had heen carried on for some time between Lady Mary Sa-vill and the Duchess of Belmont. Lady Llanberis stood leaning on Lady Mary’s arm, with a countenance expressing the most vehement interest in the subject of discussion ; animating the cold sententious delivery of her orator, by her own rapid exclamations of “Certainly—unquestionably —you are quite right—that is not to be refuted/' &c. while the Duchess stood leaning against the chimney-piece, like one “ wondering with a stupid face

I tn/ui/^	uuu	ixiuivi	u	vu	vi i wu"

trast by the niaise look of Miss O’Hal-loran, which she had assumed, to the impetuosity of Lady Llanberis’s countenance, and the frigid superciliousness of Lady Mary’s looks. The argument, however, was nearly brought to an issue, when O’Donnel and some of the gentlemen approached the group. The Duchess seemed to have sustained a defeat, and Lady Mary was triumphantly winding up her argument with—.

<c And now, having backed my opinion of Pascal by Dr. Johnson s, I presume your Grace will give up youPs: except,” added her Ladyship, with an ironical laugh, “ you appeal from Dr. Johnson.”

Ci I appeal !*’ exclaimed her Grace, coming forward with an air of evidently mock earnestness, “ from Dr. Johnson !”

“ And from Dr. Johnson to whomasked Lady Llanberis, with great vehemence. “ I like the idea

of appealing from Dr. Johnson to any one. 1 like indeed the idea of people setting themselves up in opposition to the greatest writer of the age, or of any age, or any country.5’

44 The greatest moralist of any age, undoubtedly,5’ added Lady Mary, 44 and therefore the properest umpire upon the present question.’5

44 Unquestionably,55 nodded Mr. Mussen.

44 And a man,55 said Lady Mary, 44 who, in piety and ardor of devotion, was not even second to Pascal himself.’5

44 Exactly,” said Lady Llanberis, vehemently.

44 And who,’5 continued Mr. Mussen, 44 had he entered the church, would have merited a mitre; and had he been called to the bar, might have obtained the seals.55

44 Beyond a doubt,55 echoed Lady Llanberis.

44 He lamented himself that he was

not in parliament/’ continued Mr. Mussen ; “ for he was aware that he would have made a great legislator:— he was all in all a great, a truly great man.”

Ci As far from a great man as I am ©

at this moment,” said the Duchess, laying her finger on Mr. Mussen’s sleeve to identify her proximity.

f£ Duchess, what can you mean by this?’’ asked Lady Llanberis, almost in a passion :—“ How can so young a woman set up her own opinion against the opinion of the world, at least of the wisest part of it }’*

“ On the contrary/’ said the Duchess, coolly, and endeavoring to light a pastille on the chimney-piece, “ I am agreeing with the wisest people in the wrorld —your Ladyship and Lady Mary Savilfi who disagree with poor dear Dr. Johnson in every single point you have alluded to—in politics, morals, TOL. II.	o

manners, and religion ; particularly Lady Mary/’

At this observation, the two provoked ladies laughed violently, joined by Mr. Mussen, who cried :—

“ O, very good, ^pon honor !”

While Lady Mary said : —

“ Oh, we beg of your Grace explain to us this discordance which your sagacity has discovered ; for until your superior penetration found to the contrary, I conceived myself to have been a mere devotee to Dr. Johnson.”

“ No,” said the Duchess, with gravity, “ you are a mere heretic, Lady

Marv : and think, and believe, and act

%/ 7

in direct opposition to the Johnsonian creed in every single article of faith.”

“ To begin with one, if you please/* said Lady Mary, throwing round a sarcastic look at the circle, who seemed much amused by a discussion carried on ina manner so very unequal.

“ Come/' added Lady Llanberis,

<c to begin with one, as Lady Mary says : morals, for instance/*

“ There the difference is the most striking,” returned the Duchess.— What made a part of the Doctor’s moral system, would have been deemed by Lady Mary, very justly, down-right libertinism ; for what can her Ladyship think of a man, who asserts that ‘ it is not natural for man and woman to live together in the married stated and that 4 a husband’s injideliiy is nothing?* You will, I believe, find it at page seventy-one, in the third volume of his Life, Lady Mary; and who, moreover, often observed to his own she-e!ephant—4 My dear, women should not trouble themselves about infidelity in their husbands !’ Now I appeal from Doctor Johnson ; and to you3 Lady Mary: if the General made

* Life of Johnson, yoI, 3, page 71.

o 2

such an observation to your Ladyship, would you either call or think him the great moralist !"

Every body smiled, and Lady Mary tossed her haughty head and flirted her

O */

fan. “ Then/’ continued the Duchess, “ then, Lady Mary, what must a woman of your feeling, who wrote the pathetic little poem of “ My Infant ” in answer to the other pathetic little poem of “ My Mother/’ think of the cold selfishness of a man, who declares he never could have liked a child of his own, and never wished to have one? Then, for his manners, which come in under the head of minor morals, what an inelegant, what an anti-sentimental brute—giving 6 the reply churlish* here—4 the countercheck quarrelsome9 there— and ‘ the lie direct* everywhere —-eating with the disgusting voracity of a famished wolf, and moving with the awkward gate of an half-taught bear !5*

“ That is all too true I am afraid"* said Lady Llanberis, loosening Lady Mary’s arm, and leaning on the Duchess’s.

“ Then, my dear Lady Llanberis, may I not appeal from Doctor Johnson to you on the subject of religion, you, who have just given an opinion so just of the true piety of Pascal ? Conceive a man so childishly credulous as to believe he heard his mother crying at a hundred miles distance, so—6 Sam, Sam, Sam !**

Lady Llanberis could contain herself no longer: “Go on,” she cried, bursting into a ht of laughter, in which indeed she was generally joined, for the Duchess’s imitation of an old woman’s voice was inimitable.

“ And for no motive on earth/5 continued the Duchess, gravely, “ but to scare poor Sam out of his life. Then, conceive him drawing away one of his iioofs from the threshold of the door,

o 3

because it was unlucky to come with the left Foot foremost ; turning his teacup in a particular way, to read his fortune ; summing up the evidence of an old woman’s ^witchcraft, and making a serious enquiry into the merits and veracity of the Cock-lane ghost !”

Brava ! brava !’’ exclaimed Lady Llanberis, setting the example of ano-

flier genera! Xh.’ whicll> with Sreat good will, was generally followed; for the comic humour of the Duchess’s countenance, gesture, and manner, were perfectly dramatic.

“ And now, Lady Mary,” added Lady Llanberis, “ what have you to say to all this Y’

“ Oh,*’ said Lady Mary, coldly, “ I

beg to decline the subjec- altogether;

for the defence of Doctor Johnson by

one lady, would be quite as ridiculous

as the attach bv another. 1 must, %/

however, just beg to say, that though her Grace’s statement be amusing, to

those who are not nice upon that point, yet it is partial and unfair; and that many things she has quoted against hirn were not his serious opinion. I believe it is well known that Doctor Johnson often * talked for victory,* as he has indeed himself confessed.5*

“ O, the rogue !” exclaimed the Duchess, archly ; r there is another simple sin in him.' And so he has been playing with us all this while; and we have erected his sallies into maxims, proverbs, and aphorisms ! Well, now, who would have thought that an ingenuous mind would have supported so many false positions, in so serious and so solemn a manner, that one would never suspect they were not his real sentiments? And so, after all, he perhaps did not believe in ghosts,, nor hear the voice of his good old mother at a hundred miles distance; and all these buggy-boos were conjured up to

0 4

frighten the second-sighted imagination of poor devoted Bozzy.,j>

“ As I do not understand Irish persi-flaoe5” said Ladv Marv, haughtily,

^	•/	'	O	%/	*

“ I shall leave your Grace to amuse with it those who may/’

“ But you confess before you go/’ observed the Duchess, playfully getting before her, u that Doctor Johnson and your Ladyship differ in all serious points, for that is all I want to establish.^

Lady Mary stalked away :	Mr.

Mussen stalked after her: and Lady Llanberis cried, with a yawn, “ Come, this has all been very good indeed ; and now let us have some music. Where are the Carlisles ? They have promised me IJandaPs 1 Hail-stone Chorus.’ 1 always like to begin music on a Sun-day evening with Ilandal. Come, Mr. Carlisle, sound the tocsin for the music-room and Mr. Carlisle,

snatching up a tambourin, and beating a muster, was followed by the party, three persons only remaining behind— the Duchess, and on either side of her, the Duke and Colonel O’Donnel.

“ Do you know, Duchess/* said the Duke, “ that you have been amazingly entertaining to-night—you have indeed.”

“ Then your Grace was amused by my Irish persiflage?” asked the Duchess, laughing.

“ Very much indeed : it was extremely fair. I like your brogue of all things. You don’t really mean to get rid ofit, and speak like every body else I hope. You must not indeed lose the pretty brogue.’’

“No,” said the Duchess, “"since your Grace approves it, I will cherish it, and for your sake—‘ spare the glorious faulty

The Duke bowed slightly, and looked pleased: and Lord Charles, coming

O 5

up to him, took his arm, and affecting to have something particular to tell him, led him away.

“ Aye,5' said the Duchess, shaking her head after them, 44 carry him off as you may now, vi et armis, I will have him yet on my sider

44 You must know,” she said, turning to O’Donnel, 44 that, in spite of a family prejudice existing against me in the Savill family, the Duke has all the inclination in the world to take me as ft sort of occasional elixir, or a kind of chasse-caffe ; and that Lord Charles does not chuse I should administer to his noble, good-natured, indolent, brother in any way; who, if he were only a little lightened of the embarrassment of rank, riches, and bon-ton, would be a most excellent person/’

4f if the Duke takes your Grace for a chasse-ennui/' said O'Donnel, 44 he certainly understands the properties of his specific ; at least, your conversation

bad that effect on my spirits to-night. It has tascended me into the brain,* and driven thence c all the foolish, dull, and crudy vapours which did environ it* when 1 left the dining-room.**

No, no,** said the Duchess ; “ my nostrum does not apply to you ; and I dare say you deem it mere quackery: but it takes here amazinglv. The fact is, bon-tou does stand indebted to me now and then for a sensation. My attack upon Doctor Johnson was merely a pinch of cephalic, thrown at random, to keep all alive.”

tu No more?” asked O’Donnel.

She paused for a moment, and then added : u Why yes, a little more, I am afraid. I was not sorry to have an opportunity of entering the lists against Lady Mary Savill, upon any point. She is one of those women, who, affecting a high tone of sentiment and feeling, have all the littleness of mind which belongs to the most vulgar illi-

berality : and since I have come into

her fa in i ! v, she has treated me with a %/ 9

contumelious severity, partly from the prejudice of family pride, but chiefly because I do not \flatter her pretension to talents, nor join the herd of depending dunces, who feign to take her opinion for their law : besides, in a general sense, I hate bigotry and dislike dogma, whatever form they take ; and the bigotry of blue stocking doctrines, or the dogma of bon-ton literature, are of all things the most tiresome, because both go by prevention, and have all the moroscness, without the enthusiasm, of zeal unfounded in examination or belief. Now the bas bleus of Lady Mary Savi 11 are not f celestial blue; they are indigo. She is at the head of a set of witless literati, who have for their corporate maxim,

Nul n’aura de l’esprit Hors nous et nos amis,”

who, the moment you open your lips,

knock you down with Doctor John-%/

son ; and before you are able to rise from the overthrow, beat you again over the head with Mrs. Elizabeth Carter: therefore I avoid the blow, as they do in Ireland, by giving it first. The truth is, your smatterers in literature, whether bon-ton or mauvais ton, dearly love a good stout overbearing dogmatist,, who pins them down with an opinion as they do others with an authority. This is the Pope for their church, and this is the Pope from whose inafllibility I appealed, when you joined our little conclave. I dare say you were surprised at my temerity.'° “ Â little surprized by your courage,0 returned O’Donnel, “and a good deal amused by the ingenuity of your attack. There were, however, some serious truths in the positions you so sportingly advanced. All is, as the old provençal maxim has it, heur et malheur, even in literature ; and Johnson owes much

of his celebrity to the critical hour in which his writings appeared. The inventor of a new style, at a moment favourable to any strong peculiarity of composition, he gave the air of novelty to opinions long established, and added authority and weight to others, which ought long ago to have been exploded. Although he has made no positive addition to the stock of human science, discovered no fact, invented no hypothesis, nor demonstrated any verity, he has acquired an influence over society greater perhaps than either Locke or Newton at present enjoy ; and by entangling the public mind in the network of his sophistry, has more than assisted in checking its progress during the last half century, and has given to the age in which he lived its peculiar character. With conceptions as circumscribed as his learning was extensive, he brought the whole weight, his erudition to support the grossest

O U pCL u I i IIUli ^ dlJ Ll lllC IxlUô l cX UJ C v t IJ U tl-

ons of temporal government. Entertaining no very profound respect for truth, he was content to bully where he felt he could not convince.

He scorned those common wares to trade in, Reas’ning, convincing, and persuading,

But made each sentence current pass,

With puppy, coxcomb, scoundrel, ass.

Churchill.

“ While thus he silenced the timidj the groanings of his religious terrors were mistaken by the good for piety ; and his old Stuart doctrines of divine right (cast by a pension, at the feet of his legitimate sovereign) passed current with the loyal for affection to the ki ll& and devotion to the state. But perhaps 1 speak under the influence of prejudice : for 1 cannot readily approve the writer, and still less the man, who has profaned the sacred names of Russel and of Sydney, with epithets of

vulgar virulence and coarse opprobrium. Nor, perhaps,he added, smiling, “ will your Grace forgive me, for thus hanging the clog of my dull comment upon the soul and spirit of your text/* “ If you mean to apologize for talking sense to me,*' she returned, 44 spare yourself the trouble: it is at least gracious for its novelty/*

A silence for a minute ensued : the Duchess seemed to have' fallen into a reverie : her eyes were fixed to the ground, with their look of melancholy wildness ; and the gaiety of her countenance fled. She appeared to have retired within herself ; and some thought of latent regret seemed to revive amidst the associations of her playful mind, and hang its cloud upon the lustre of her susceptible spirits.

O’Donnel fixed his eyes on her face, wondering at its rapid change of expression.	44 What an extraordinary

J %/

mind I	he mentally observed—

s< what an extraordinary countenance ! Does any heart accompany all this ? or is ail acuteness and vivacity vanity and exhibition ?”

Almost as he asked himself the question, her eyes abruptly met his : she as suddenly averted them, and accompanied with her voice the symphony of an air which was playing in the adjoining room. “ Had we not/’ she said3 “ better join the musicians r‘; and immediately she moved forward. O’Donnel followed, and saw her the next moment the centre of a "group, composed of the foolish and the vain» the dissipated and the dull. Miss Carlisle had just finished a fine bravura of Winter’s, well executed and well accompanied, when Lady Llanberis approached the Duchess, and kneelingon a cushion before her, said, 6t I come with a petition. I know you do not sing out of your own house, but you .must not, cannot refuse me.”

“ We vote this petition frivolous and vexatious/’ returned the Duchess in parliamentary language:	but	after

much solicitation and much refusing, she suffered herself to be prevailed on, and was led to the instrument by General Savill. O’Donnel followed the group, who encircled her, mentally enquiring if this was the same person to whose acute observations he had listened ueîôi’C with SO mudl pleasure.

The subject next in debate was, what she should sing— an Irish melody, or a Savoyard ballad. She ended the long-agitated question herself.— “ Corne/’ said she, “ I will siug you a little French romance, which you wilj all like, I answer for it.’’

ft Oh, I adore French romances/’ exclaimed Lady Llanberis.

“ It is composed,” said the Duchess, gravely, “on tiiiiee notes; on three notes only/’

now wonaeriui :	was	ecnoeo	Troui

every side : “ three notes ! only think of that !”

“ And it is played upon two instruments” continued her Grace, drawing the harp close to the piano-forte.

“Charming, charming!” was the general exclamation. “ Two instruments!—how odd!**

“ To add to the interest, it is composed, words and music, by JeanJdeques Rousseau!*'*

“ Good heavens ! Duchess, will you

%■

ever begin ?” exclaimed Lady Llanberis with vehement impatience.

'The Duchess threw her right hand over the strings of the harp, with the left touched the keys of the pianoforte, and thus accompanied, with a common chord, an air as simple as its

*■ Perhaps Rousseau’s little romance, beginning “ Que le jour me dure,” which is composed on three notes.

three notes could make it. It was scarcely possible to judge of her voice, she sung in so suppressed a tone ; and it was imjjossible not to accuse her of affectation, from the peculiar look she threw into her eyes and countenance. A rapturous applause followed the indifferent execution of this indifferent composition : “ Brava, bravissima,” resounded on every side, and an “encore,” was called.

“No, no,” said the Duchess, “ I never repeat myself in any possible way; but I will sing you an Irish howl, if you will.”

“ By all means/’ cried Lady Llanbe-ris :—“ an Irish howl ! how odd 1”

The Duchess now drew the harp towards her, and swept with a light and brilliant finger a characteristic prelude over its chords. She chose a very fine, and very ancient Irish melody, but having gone through the first part in a manner totally different from her former

sryie or singing, sue rose irom me instrument, and, either through weariness or caprice, refused to finish it. As the whim of this proceeding was at least worth the rest of the song, it only rendered her more popular than ever with Lady Llanberis, who went on exclaiming, “ What a delightful creature! there is nobodv so amusing-.

%/	O

It is all envy and prejudice, endeavouring to cry her down ; and she is quite right about Doctor Johnson : the tiresome man with his hoof and his tea-cup.

'The Miss Carlisles and their brothers now began an old canon at the request of their mother, who went about canvassing applause for her mii-s’cal offspring, crying herself, while she affected to beat time, ,c a charming strain !’’

O’Douuel had left the apartment before the Duchess had risen from her harp. lie was alone, walking up

** ■

»

*

♦ *V

"

t

ence/ she said archly, “ which militated against your reason ?’’

“ At least I would try. I do not say I should succeed : indeed, from the experiment of your Grace’s song, I feel I should sometimes fail/’

“ This is very gallant/’ she replied, seating herself upon a couch, against the back of which O’Donnel leaned.

“It is very true, however; and to qualify a little what your Grace calls my gallantry, 1 will confess that your French song pleased me as little a6 your Irish air pleased me too much. You surely forgot the advice ofyour author, so peculiarly applicable to his own simple compositions :—II ne faut, pour chanter la romance, cju’unc voix juste ct nette, qui prononce bien3 et qui chante simplement.’’

“That may do for you and Rousseau, Colonel O’Donnel, but I sung for my audience ; and your simple style would

stand but a poor chance against my little mignardcrie.	What did you

think of my face when I sung ? Ï always make a pretty face upon those occasions. You cannot think how it tells. Nobody sees that I call up the same look for all sorts of sentiments, from Nina pazza, to the Blue Bells of Scotland. I make the face, and they all cry ‘ how interesting she looks when she sings!* The truth is, the world loves a little acting; and, as Queen Elizabeth said of the ritual she was making for her prayer-loving subjects, 6 they shall get enough of it.”

O’Donnel laughed, and returned : cc Since your Grace encourages my frankness by your own, I do confess I perceived you were endeavouring to look delightfully with all your might; and where you made no such effort, I thought you succeeded better. There

V V	MVi 1	I */	7

the policy of a foreign ruler should have prohibited the singing of such a song with such a countenance.”

At that moment Lady Llanberis entered the room. 46 Oh, Duchess V9 she exclaimed; but perceiving O’Don-nel leaning over the back of her Grace's seat, she suddenly stopped ; and then added, with pointed coldness : rt I beg pardon; I did not know your Grace was so particularly engaged ;3> and immediately flounced out of the room.

t£ How extraordinary !” said the Duchess, rising in some confusion. 46 What can she mean ? Pray follow her. Colonel.”

“ To what purpose ?,J asked CPDon-nel, surprized at Lady* Llanberis’s manner, but still more at the emotion of the Duchess, whom he believed beyond the possibility of being moved by any thing.

VOL. II.	v

i nen i win rouow ner, sne saici, and flew into the music-room, while O’Donnel, taking a book, retired to his own.

I

NOTE S,

Cornet, Page 12,—The ancient Irish armies had horns, a kind of domestic trumpet, in every battalion, vvith notes peculiar to the different battalions, for the more precise knowledge of the duty required of each. But the Irish Corna was not devoted alone to martial purposes ; meadh was fre-> quently quaffed out of them, as the Danish hunters do their beverage at (his day, and the English did their’s in the time of Chaucer.

See Walker s Irish Bards.

James sat by the fire-side, with double beard,

And drinketh of his bugle-horn the wine.

Franklin s Tale, Vol. 2. p. SOU.

Page 14, 28.—Ilugue O’Donnel un des plus puissans Princes d’Irelande, apres O’Niel, quoique il fut encor jeun par rapport a son age, ayant a peine vingt ans, il etoit encor mure par rapport a sa prudence, et ses antres virtus, étant arrivé dans

p 2

tout son droit, et il fut, reconnu d’un voix unanime et couronné Prince de Tirconncl par O’Phrile qui doit le ministre ordinaire de cette ceremonie.

Histoire d'Irclatide, par L’Abbé Mc. Groghan.

Page 46.—The Irish, under all their grievances, appealed from time to time, to the English sovereigns, against those sent to rule them, u whose conduct,” as the Lord Deputy Mountjoy expressed it, ec was sufficient to drive the best a*.d quietest states into confusion,”* and whose oppressions were mere!}' exercised for the purpose of multiplying forfeitures. The sovereign, though he could not always afford them redress, never denied them sympathy and compassion. Henry the Third personally interested himself in their favor; and Elizabeth, when she read an account of their sufferings, in one of their own pathetic remonstrances, burst into tears, and said to Lord Burleigh : u It may be said of me, as of Tiberius by Bato, It is you who are to blame, who have committed your flock, not to shepherds, but to wolves.”

James the First, in most instances, shewed favorable dispositions towards Ireland ; and Charles the

* Lord Mountjoy's Letter, Fecal. Hibcrn. Sub. Lincm.

First, in 1628, gave his royal word to the Commons of Ireland, that he would put a stop to the inquiry into defective titles, a sort of rapine committed by his deputies in Ireland, on the property of the natives ; but he was daringly opposed in the fulfilment of this promise by the Lord Deputy Wentworth, who carried his point in the House of Commons. During the rebellion of 1641, the Puritans were at the head of Irish affairs It is a singular circumstance that a letter was found in the study of Doctor Borlase (the then law-justice), after his death, written by the king, to inform him of the intended insurrection, and calling upon him to crush it in its infancy. Unfortunately this letter was neither attended to, nor revealed : and the king himself was afterwards accused of being the instigator of the rebellion ; for Sir Phelim O’Neil was promised his pardon, if he would confess that he held his commission from {£ Charles Stuart,” as his judges, on his trial, called their king.

See the Duke of Ormond's papers in “ Historical Collect s tionsf by the Rev. Doctor Neilson, an eminent Protestant Divine, and an impartial Historian.

Page 55.-—The words of the celebrated Charles O’Connor of Ballinagar, and applied to himself. Although he afterwards became so distinguished as the author of many beautiful tracts, and as a man

T1 3

of science, he was of necessity, from the nature of the times, educated by stealth, and, like O’Don-nel, by a man who had once lived in courts, and been distinguished by princes, and who in his old age found no refuge from misfortune but in th« solitudes of rocks, morasses, and mountains : such was O’Roark, Bishop of Killala, and uncle and preceptor to O’Connor. After having lived in the Imperial Court as Secretary to a Prince, love of country brought him back to Ireland, when the Penal Statutes were in full force. Though protected by letters from the English Sovereign to the leading nobility in Ireland, nothing could save him from persecution : he wandered for years among the wilds and bogs of the Joyce Country : he at last found refuge in the solitudes of Ballynagar, and being a man' of great learning and science, devoted himself to the education of his nephew. Caro-lan, the famous Irish bard, was sometimes present at their studies, and the following anecdote is no bad picture of the times it relates to.

u Nor would the good Bishop allow him (hi* nephew) to neglect the study of the Irish language. One day, w hen he had succeeded very happily in describing to a friend in Vienna the miseries of the old Irish, a task pointed out to him by the Bishop, he told him he would never more write in Irish, since he had succeeded so well in English.

“ No,’ said the Bishop, 4 what you have once

learned, you must never forget ; and you must not go to rest till you have translated the Miserere into Irish.’ He complied, and his translation was superior to Bedel’s. Carolan, who was present when it was read by the Bishop, in a solemn, affecting voice, burst into tears, and seizing his harp, in a fit of rapturous affection for the family of Ballinagar, swept along the strings in a sudden fit of inspiration his 6 Donagh-Cahilloig singing extempore the fall of the Milesian race, the hospitality of the old O'Connor, and his greatness of soul, who, in the midst of crosses and calamities, harboured that very night in his house a crowd of reduced gentlemen, and had hired a number of harpers to strike up a solemn concert at midnight-mass ; for it was Christmas-eve.”

See the life of Charles O'Connor of Ballinagar, Esq.

M. R. I. A.

Page 64, 66, 67.—I felt that these brave men were right.

This incident is taken from some biographical anecdotes of the famous Count O’Rourke, which are here subjoined—extracted from a periodical publication.

COUNT O^ItOURKE.

The very remarkable gentleman, whose descent and genealogy, as distributed by himself, we havô

f 4

published, was born at a village near the ancient castle and extensive forest of Woodford, in the county of Leitrim, and province of Connaught, which was the residence of his royal ancestors. He acquired a knowledge of the language, accent, and manners, of his native country, so fixed and rooted, that though lie has lived ever since his twenty-fifth year abroad, he yet preserves the broad dialect, and the peculiar style of Ireland. In his twTenty« fifth year he came to London, where he remained upwards of five years, experiencing many disappointments. He embarked in several pursuits, but ultimately fixed on the military profession, as the best suited to his genius and disposition. In the first troop of horse-guards lie received the rudiments of arms, but, being a Roman Catholic, he was forced to resign. He then went to France, and presented to the king, at Versailles, a petition, specifying his princely origin, and praying for a regiment. In consequence of which, in the year 1758, he was made a captain of the Royal Scotch in that service. It is well-known how difficult a matter it is for a foreigner to get advanced in that jealous and national corps. As few instances of irregular promotions had been known in the brigade, the lieutenants were all, to a man, hurt at the appointment ; and being resolved to contest the matter with him, it was decided at the point of the sword ; and the Count, in the space of a few days.

fought four duels, in which he gained great reputation ; not more by bis gallantry in the field, than by honorably confessing, that he thought it an injury to the national regiment that a foreigner should be thrust upon them : and he therefore gave up his commission, informing the grand monarch, that it was a dear purchase to fight for it every day. At this time he formed an intimate acquaintance with the Polish ambassador, and his lady. A soldier of fortune is a soldier for the ladies ; and it has through life been the plan and ambition of the Count, to connect gallantry with enterprize, and pay as much regard to the eyes of beauty, as to the standard of his commander. The beau monde of Paris declared him to be the cicisbeo of the ambassador’s lady, through whose interest he was introduced to king Stanislaus, from whom he received the promise of an honorable appointment ; but having too much activity in his nature to wait in idleness for the slow performance of a royal promise, he went to Russia, with strong recommendations from France to the court of Petersburgh, which being then engaged in a war with Prussia, was the scene for adventure and fame. He was appointed first major of horse cuirassiers, in the regiment of body guards; and, in the course of the war, he distinguished himself greatly, and, in particular, by storming the city of Berlin, which he laid under contribution. At the end of that war, he was in-

p /»

titcd by the great Frederick to come and see him at his court. He was advised not to go, as the soldiery had committed several of the outrages which are but too frequent in the heat of conquest ; but the Count said, that the man who was abraveenemy, could not be a dangerous friend : and he went to Berlin, where he was most graciously received by the Prussian monarch. In a conversation between them, Frederick asked him, how he could entertain the ambitious hope of succeeding in an attempt against Berlin ? The Count replied, in one of those gasconades which are pardonable in a knight errant, that if he had been ordered by his commanding officer to storm the heights of heaven, he would have made the attempt. The Count now returned to France, with certificates of his gallant conduct, from Peter the Third, Prince General Wolkonskoy* and General de Souvorow. On his return, he was appointed by King Stanislaus one of his chamberlains, which appointment took place in 1764. In the year 1770, he was appointed by the French king, a colonel of horse, and was enrolled among the nobility of France; and in the year 1774, he was honored with the order of St. Louis.

At the commencement of the present war, lie came over to England, declaring, now that his own country wanted his arm, lie would not fight under a foreign banner. He brought with him all his certificates, titles, and recommendations; and, among

otners, one irom tne iving oi rrance te nis present Majesty. He was introduced by his friend, the late Lord Cunningham, to Lords North and Stormont, and was introduced by Lord Stormont to the king at St. James’s. He proposed to Lord North to raise three regiments of Roman Catholics in his native country, to be employed against the Americans, provided they would give him the commission of Colonel Commaudant—but his offer was rejected ; and in all his applications he has been treated by the ministry with indifference or scorn. He proposed to them to quell the riots in the year 1780, at the head of the Irish chairmen—but all his offers have been treated contemptuously ; in consequence of which it w-as that he distributed the genealogy which is prefixed, and along with it all the certificates and honors which he received during his residence abroad. He still preserves all the dignity of a prince, and many anecdotes occur, to shew’ how much he disdains the upstart families, as he calls them, of England.

Page 110.—The Bishop of Derry being at dinner one day, an Irish harper came in, and sung an old ode to the harp, the substance of which was, that in such a place, pointing to the very spot near

Ballyshannon, a man of gigantic figure lay buried? and that over his breast and back were plates of pure gold, and on his fingers rings of the same : the place was so minutely described, that two of the company were tempted to examine into it, and did accordingly find two pieces of pure gold.

See the Bishop of Londons edition of Cambden, p. 1411.

Page 111.—This curious and most ancient family relic is a silver box lined with brass : the top is gilt and set with large pieces of crystal, and other stones of various shapes. It is divided into three compartments; the centre represents Saint Columb sitting in his Cathedra ; that on his right, a Bishop, and that on his left, is a representation of the Crucifixion, attended by the two Marys. The border on the top and bottom consists of lions and griffins, and the sides are oak leaves. On the left is a silver censor, suspended from a chain of the same metal, and it has been evidently used as a portable altar, or pix. At the foot of the saint’s figure is a setting, with a piece of glass covering ; some small bits of red cloth, supposed to be a relic of the saint’s garment. It is by no means of contemptible workmanship : within is contained a wooden box, and in it is a manuscript on vellum, which is supposed,

ana wun reason, to nave been tne property oi Saint C'olumb-kill, who was of this family, and the patron saint and apostle of the Highlands of Scotland, and founder of the monastery now bearing his name, Ily Colum-Cille, and which was the usual place of sepulture for the kings of Scotland.

In the year 1723 this box was in the possession of Daniel O’Donnel, a Colonel in the service of His Most Christian Majesty, who, to preserve it from decay, it being much injured by time, caused a new case to be made round its sides, \vlnch has made it very strong, and effectually answered the intended purpose. Round the bottom he placed this inscription : u James the Third, King of Great Britain, being in exile, Daniel O’Donnel, a Colonel in the service of His Most Christian Majesty, repaired the silver work, which time had worn away from this hereditary relict of St. Columb, called Caah, in the year of salvation, 1723.^

Round the bottom of the original was an ancient inscription, apparently in the Irish character, but so much injured and defaced, as to be illegible. Sir Capel Molyneux, Bart, who married Margaret, *

* Jacobo tertio M. Bi. rege exulante, Daniel O’Donnel Xtianissimo iroperatori prefectus rei bellicæ, hnjusce hereti-darii sui, Colurabani pignons, vulgo caah dicti, argentum vetustate consuinptum restauravit. An. Salutis, 1723.

the daughter of the late, and sister of the present Sir Neil O’Donncl, being in France during the short peace of 1802, heard that the last of the O’Donnels of France, to whom this relict had descended, had, by his. will, left it to O’Donnel of Newport in the County of Mayo, made inquiry into the matter ; and having ascertained it to be fact, applied to the person in whose care it had been deposited, on behalf of the late Sir Neale O’Don. nel ; and having obtained it, brought it with him to Ireland, and delivered it safely to Sir Neale, in whose custody it remained till his death.

Page 114.—This incident may appear to o’erstefc the modesty of probability, but it actually occurred some years back in the family of the late Wogan Brown, Esq. of Castle Brown, Kildare.

Mr. Brown, w’ho was in Germany, wrote to have some fine English horses, which were in his own stables at Castle Brown, sent over to him. The Irish groom who attended them, and who was known in the family by the name of Ned Byrne, proposed taking them over to his master, though he had never been a dozen miles from Castle Brown in his life : this was at last agreed to, and Mr. Brown’s agent in London had orders to provide him when he arrived there with an interpreter and

guide to accompany him ; but on hearing the immense sum this person was to receive, he would not hear of his master being put do suck an expense, and 44 engaged he would deliver the bastes safe into his master’s ozon hands.” When expostulated with, and the distance represented to him, he replied : 44 Why, sure, an’t I come to the world’s end already?” meaning London : 44 devil a much further I can go, any how.” He set off, therefore, for Vi-enna, with the 44 'bastes;” reached it perfectly safe, and on his arrival, found his master had gone to Florence. As Italy or Germany were quite equal to Ned Byrne, he set forth again on his travels. As he passed through some garrison town on the frontiers of Germany, Colonel Count Dalton happened to be looking out of a window, and offered to lay a wager with some German officers, that that was an Irish groom riding by. On addressing Ned in English, lie found he was servant to his friend. Mr. Brown. Much amused with his adventures, he gave him several letters to the post-masters on the route, to facilitate his Italian journey ; every one of which Ned delivered to his master unopened\ when he reach -1 Florence. 44 What use was there in them, your Honor,” he observed: 44 sure, what better could I do, then I done.” Ned returned, extremely delighted with his travels, to Castle Brown, without having understood a word of any language he had heard, from the time he left Eng-

land. A few years afterwards, Mr. Brown sent over some horses from Ireland to his brother, the present General Brown, the friend and Aul-de-Camp to the King of Saxouy. General Brown was then at the Court of Dresden, where Ned Byrne had an opportunity of seeing several of his fair countrywomen, who were in attendance on the Electrcss. His account of his short nVidencc at Dresden, was, on his return, extremely amusing. u And there was the Giniral in his elegint regi-mintals going to payers with the Royal Family : and there was Countess O’Kelly, and Couutess O’Callaghan, mighty glad to sec me, and no wise proud : troth, not a bit of pride among them.”

For this little anecdote of t£ Ned Byrne's tra-vels,” I am indebted to General Brown himself, who had the goodness to repeat it to me a few hours before the writing of this note.

Page 246—Lepreghaun. It would be extremely difficult to class this supernatural agent, who holds a distinguished place in the Irish u Faerie.” His appearance, however, is supposed to be that of a shrivelled little old man, whose presence marks a spot where hidden treasures lie concealed, which were buried there in ct the troubles.'1' lie is, therefore, generally seen in lone and dismal places, out

of the common haunts of man ; and though the night-wanderer may endeavour to mark the place where he beheld the guardian of the treasures perched, yet when he returns in the morning with proper imnlcni'-iits to turn up the earth, the thistle, stone, or branch, he h.-e placed as a merk, is so multiplied, that it is no longer a distinction, and the disappointments occasioned by the malignity of the litHo Lepreghaun vender him a very unpopular fairy. His name is never applied but as a term of contempt.

Page 058.—Plaeraca na Ruarca, or O’Rourke’s noble feast, was composed by Cnrolan, the first of the Irish bards, and translated most humorously, or rather versified in English, by Dean Suift. The story on which it is founded makes a par* of a tradition sometime back current in the County of Leitrim, where the ruins of the castle of the O’Ruarcs, most romantically situated, still moulder, on a precipitous rock, which frowns over a rapid river, near Mannor-Hamilton. The substance of the tradition is as follows : O’Rourke, -the chief of Bresuy, a brave aad powerful person, was invited by Queen Elizabeth to London, though under the displeasure of the Lord President Bingham. The Queen made him warm professions of

honors and service, intending by this invitation to lead him into a kind of exile, in order to secure his obedience. O’Rourke confided, and obeyed her summons ; but before his departure, he assembled his vassals and friends in the great hall of his castle, and entertained them "with all the splendor of the times. (Such was the parting feast which gave rise to the song of the bard in after-days). On the arrival of the Irish chief in Whitehall, tho Queen was ready to receive him. The elegant synu metry of his person, and his noble aspect, struck Her Majesty, and lie was soon ranked amongst her choicest favorites. One night a person tapped at his door, and was admitted—it was a woman. The visit continued to be repeated, and the visitant to retire before day-light. The Chief’s curiosity be. came urgent : he pressed the mysterious lady to reveal herself, but she refused : a straggling moonbeam, however, discovered to him a ring that glittered on her finger : he examined it unobserved by the wearer. The next day he saw it upon the Queen’s finger at Court, and had theimprudencc to hint his suspicion to Her Majesty. His fatal curiosity (adds the tradition) was punished with secret death—he was assassinated that night.

See Walker s Irish Bards.

The catastrophe of this provincial tale is poetical, but happens not to be historical. O’Rourke

was publicly executed in London. The crime of •which he was accused, was, having received under his roof some shipwrecked Spaniards. His son took up arms to avenge his father’s death, and the spoliation of his own property by the Lord President, and joined u O’Donnel the Red,” in those contests in which General Clifford was killed.

END OF VOL. II*

O’DO NX E L.

CHAPTER 19

The next morning O’Donnel took the opportunity of frnding Lady Lian-beris at a window in the breakfast room, where all the party were assembled, to remind her of the appointment which had been broken, or to induce her to renew a promise she seemed to have forgotten : she received his address with coldness, and made some evasive reply. O’Donnel was for a moment thrown back : he feared he had offended, and yet was unconscious of his fault ; he ventured, however, to VOL. III.	B

express a hope that the honor she had proposed conferring upon him was not withdrawn, but delayed. Lady Llan-beris replied, with an air of humor, that “ nothing under a Laplander would walk to-day ; the ground is frozen over, and you cannot expect me to skctit a walk, Colonel, 1 suppose.”

“ I expect nothing, ” returned O’Donnel, a little surprized ; while endeavoring to avoid the appearance of chagrin, he gaily added :	but

ska i tin g a walk is neither so impracticable nor so disagreeable a thing as your Ladyship may suppose; at least, I once skaited a journey in Holland, and found it a pleasant and expeditious mode of travelling.”

“ Skaited a journey !” echoed her Ladyship, her face brightening into smiles of pleasurable amazement: “how very odd ! how very delightful ! you must tell me all about it, Colonel O'Donnel.—General, pray come here.

Only think, Colonel O'Donnel has skaited a journey !”

“ I have skaited some leagues myself in Holland,” said the General. e‘ I was once famous for that work, and belonged for some years to the skaiting club of Edinburgh. But I don’t think we English make good skaiters, Colonel.”

“ We used to think abroad/’ said O'Donnel, u that you performed feats of great agility on the ice, but that your skaits were not well constructed.”

“ Colonel O’Donnel,” said Lady Llanberis, with great eagerness, “will you do me the favor of giving a plan for skaits to my smith : we’ll have a number of them made directly: there will be no end to this frost, you may ' depend upon that. I dare say the Duchess skaits like an angel, and I know you might light fires upon the great pond in front of the house. General, pray ring the bell stay., Ccdo & 2

Bel, will you walk with me to my smith’s forge? We will go this moment : there is nothing on earth like a skait-ing party. What attitudes Mr. Carlisle will make! I’ll just get on my pelisse and snow shoes, and voua shall meet

y	4f

me in the hall.”

O’Donncl, laughing to himself, yet glad to have the opportunity of the walk, followed her out of the room. As he passed the Duchess, who was in conversation with the Duke, he perceived her e}res fixed on Lady Llan-beris and himself; and, when he stopped" to make the salutations of the morning, for she had newly entered the room, she said significantly : “ You had better proceed.”

While he waited for her Ladyship in the hail, her page brought him a message that she begeed he would go to me forge by himself, and bespeak tlic skaits, for she found it too cold to go out. O’Donnel, again disappoint-

ed, prepared lo obey the request, when throwing up his eyes to the gallery which ran round the hall, he perceived Lady Lianberis and Lord Charles passing alons; it together. The sudden

O	O	O

change in her intention was now accounted for: he had, from various circumstances, not to be mistaken, concluded that Lord Charles was the acknowledged lover of Lady Lianberis, and Miss Carlisle, who was as liberal of her communications as of her attentions, had, indeed, hinted to him, that as soon as the widower’s mourning was laid aside, he was to become the husband of his late wife’s dearest friend. Yet nothing could be more coldly indifferent than the manner of the lover; nothing more careless and general than the conduct of the mistress. Lord * Charles, to all outward seeming, was a phlegmatist by constitution, and an egoist by system. The exclusive selfishness which stood in the place of

T*> Q

every better feeling, and betrayed it? influence through aîI the openings of his unnmiable character, evidently lent its frigid coloring, even to his preference for a woman to whom he had long given the éclat of his attentions.

I3e stood, indeed, at the head of that class of apathetic men of gallantry, qui se laissait aimer; and who are, perhaps, peculiar to the age and circle in which he lived: who, if they sometimes commit the feelings of the objects they select, never risk their own ; who lounge away their mornings in boudoirs, their evenings in assembly rooms ; correspond voluminously on note-paper into all the little gossip and frivolous anecdote of the day ; and plot, manœuvre, am! intrigue, according to the interests and the views of that' heartless vanity in which

Li They live and breathe, and have their being,” less anxious to be loved than to bdl

adulated—to awaken a-sentiment than to expose a triumph: they demand obvious attentions, rather than hidden devotion; nor seek in the equivocal tie, which springs so much oftener from general suitableness than particular sympathy, the exclusiveness of friendship, nor the tenderness of passion.

This heartless connection, the lady’s fair character alone excepted, frequently recalled to O’Donnel’s mind those no less cold, but more profligate, liaisons which marked the exhausted gallantry of French society, in its last stage of moral degradation, where virtue was violated from no stronger motive than the gratification of vanity, or the removal of ennui; and vice sought neither its charm nor its excuse in the tyranny of the senses, or the illusions of love.

The day passed over O’Donnel’s head unoccupied and unenjoyed. He had rambled abroad without interest,

e 4

and had returned without object. The comfortless grandeur of a great house struck him in ail its coldness, where the fire-side nitch, the central point of domestic sociality, is always wanting; where there is so frequently solitude without privacy, and loneliness without retirement ; and where the feelings, like theguests,aredissipatedand abroad, for want of some attractive influence to fix and concentrate them at home. The large, empty, and splendid rooms looked gloomy and comfortless, unoccupied by the gay groups of the evening, which were now all dispersed. O’Donnel, a stranger to all, and assimilated to none, had not been invited to join in any pursuit, or to attach himself to any party : cheerless and low-spirited, he involuntarily looked forward towards the evening, when lights and noise would inevitably reflect upon his imagination, and when perhaps tne brilliant pleasantry and gay acuteness of the Duchess might chase

the demon of spleen, and if they awakened, not interest, at least bring distraction.

In this hope he was deceived. The Duchess played all night at picquet with the General. Mr. Frederick Carlisle, who wished to advertise himself as her lover in the most extravagant sense of the word, with no other view than the hope of participating in her notoriety, hung over the back of her chair, murmuring his homage in such scraps of Italian verses as memory supplied him with from his sister’s music-books. Meantime Lady Mary sat near the table, dispensing criticism and sentiment to Mr. Mussen, for ready approbation ; and looks of keen reproach at . the General, for his equal want of dignity and want of taste. Mr. Wharton dozed on one Ottoman, because Lord Charles dozed on another. And Lady Llanberis played vingt-une with the

B 5

Duke. The rest of the party were divided between a round game and the billiard-room, with the exception of Miss Carlisle, who had singled out O’Donnel, and with an earnestness quite irresistible, had insisted on his becoming her pupil at a Trou-Madame board, a game of which he had unluckily declared his ignorance in order to avoid playing. Miss Carlisle’s eyes had already told him, among other u fair speechless messages/’ that he was the handsomest man in the world; and that the opinion might not be “ wholly drawn in the flattering table of an eye/’ she confessed that she had modelled his head in wax, and that it precisely resembled an Antinous she had done some time before, from the bust in D—— House. Naivete was Miss Carlisle’s profession ; and she teas as naïve as young ladies generally are who have passed the last fifteen years

U1 UlCil 1IVC3 ill LUC UU9UC auu lUlll^UC

o

of what is termed the world.

The Duchess retired early, before Miss Carlisle and O’Donnel had finished their game: and though she paused fora moment.near the table, to speak to Mr. Frederick Carlisle, who had followed her with the good-night speed), from Romeo and Juliet, and returned Miss Carlisle’s bon-soir, yet she passed on without noticing her opponent. It did not escape O’Donnel that he was not included in her salutations, and he was yet more struck with the consciousness that he had observed it. He began to think she was inclined to play the fine lady to its utmost extravagance, and that she had even taken the April-day conduct of the constitutionally capricious Countess for her model.

“ So much the worse for her,” he mentally observed. “ Her original sins

O

are delightful, if they are not respect-

able; but when she becomes the copyist of another’s follies, she ceases either to pique or interest.” lie was surprized to find that, with respect to himself, she had already done both.

O’Donnel had but just finished his game, when Lady Llanberis sent for him to join her supper-table. Me entered more than usual into general conversation, from the circumstance of her having introduced Ireland as a topic; and she had led him so deeply into its antiquities,, that, enamoured with the subject, she begged for memoranda of Grose and \rallancey’s treatises, that she might consult them at her leisure.

Although he had been much ani-mated by the discussion, yet, when at a late hour he rose from table, he felt piqued, he knew not with whom ; disappointed, he knew not by what; and he retired to his room discontented with himself, and with every one about

him. ri is îormer rastiaiousness respecting society returned upon him: and wearied by the folly and emptiness, which on the preceding night had amused, if it had not interested, he blamed others for that which was only, perhaps, pitiable in himself.

Languid and frivolous, however, as O’Donnel still found the circle in which he was so strangely included, without giving it more of his approbation, he had yet insensibly granted it more of his indulgence. Although he knew not where his repugnance ceased, or his toleration began, he was still aware that his impatience for an éclaircissement with Lady Llanberis, which would probably terminate his

visit, did not increase with the delays

%/

it had experienced : and he teit that he became every clay less uneasy under the difficulties which impeded his return.

Another and another day elapsed.

New visitors brought new engagements. Lady Llanberis was wholly engrossed with the strangers, as long as they were strangers, and O’Donnel found no opportunity of addressing even a word to her. The parvenue pee)css seemed an object of great curiosity to the new arrivals, who were persons of high rank and fashion. She was continually drawn

out bv her fair hostess, herself “ no-%/

thing loth,” and remained the leading feature of attraction and interest, during the short stay of the noble guests. Lady Llanberis was delighted with her own character of cicenme to her favorite of the hour; called on her for the droll story she had told on such a day ; the pretty song she sung on such a night; insisted on her remembering such an impromptu, or repeating such a bon-mot; would fain have made her dance a butfa pas de deux by herself, and maintain over again her Johnsonian dialogue with Lady Mary, without the

aid of an interlocutor. The Duchess only stopped short of the ridiculous, though she exhibited freely ; vet when Lady Llanberis happened to go too deep icithin the lines of bad taste, her lion always turned restive; and upon one occasion she said to Q’Donnel, almost loud enough to be heard by all : —

44 Allons, Mademoiselle, parlez la philosophie, pour Monsieur, et puis nous aurons de la Théologie thus drawing a parity between herself with Lady Llan-beris, and the Duchess de Fertè with the first celebrated Madame de Staal ; and convincing O’Donne! that governed, though not deceived by her own

vanitv, she secretly ridiculed the folly

*- «/

of which she was at once both the agent and the object.

Her character, indeed, as he endeavored to catch its features through the inequalities of her manner and conduct, gave endless play to conjecture, and room for observation ; there was some-

tiling so pleasantly incongruous in her mingled cynicism and gaiety, her knowledge of human weakness, and liberal contribution to its absurdities, that he was amused even where he was not particularly interested, and fascinated even when he did not quite approve. But, either by system or inadvertency, she had latterly found her way to his consideration, through the medium of his self-love, and excited interest, where, perhaps, she only sought to win applause; for the appeals which his better sense made, at times, to his good opinion, betrayed an anxiety to obtain it, through the real or feigned indifference of her general manner; and the energy of mind she evinced in some of their particular conversations, when he was “ sole auditor,” contrasted with her general frivolity to others, rendered her more attractive, in proportion as this distinction was more flattering.

o,

and by increasing the originality of

her character, and adding to the inconsistencies of her conduct, gave, perhaps, to both a charm, which more uniform excellence could not have possessed.

But the credit she thus far obtained had its balance on the contra page of his opinion. I he disguise in which she had wrapt her character, while in the family of Lady Singleton, betrayed a command of feeling little consonant to the prompt sensibility of her age and sex, and excited wonder that

6i One so young could give out such

A seeming-----”

And her marriage with the Duke of Belmont led him to suspect that she was deficient in that feminine delicacy? without which woman was to him a thing unsexed. Like ail men, whose strong passions and peculiar modes of life have led them to seek the rounds of pleasure in their least excusable

form, O’Donnel had raised a rigid standard on the ground of his ill-bought experience, and was severe and fastidious on the subject of female conduct, in proportion to the opportunities afforded him of viewing it in its coarsest aspect.

The want of delicacy in woman was always, in his estimation, proportioned to her want of sensibility—the quality most necessary to the self-love of man, and therefore the most reluctantly dispensed with. But of the Duchess of Belmont’s natural coldness, he had the most thorough conviction, and he believed that her spirit, like Beatrice’s, was invulnerable against all assaults of affection: her careless gaiety, her general indifference, her vanity, and even her idle encouragement of the vain and frivolous Frederick Carlisle, were all proofs to him of her inherent heartlessness ; for though it was evident that the ambition to which she had

imolated, taste, feeling, and ’natural antipathy, would never permit her to “ abase her eyes” on one, who, far from feeding the passion, would render the sacrifices she bad already made to it abortive: yet she evidently encouraged his attentions, merely that he might serve as a mark for her pleasantries, and contribute to the gratification of her vanity.

On the same day on which the fly-ins: visitors took their leave, O Donnel v received a message from Lady Llan-beris to attend her in her dressing-room. His hour he believed was at length arrived. Whatever were the views which had induced this whimsical but generous woman to invite him from Ireland, they would now be revealed, even if they were not accomplished ; and the opportunity would be of course afforded him of returning her money. He was, however, disappointed to find lier Ladyship not as he expected, alone.

but looking ovor some books at a table, at which also stood the Duchess and the two elder Miss Carlisles.

“ (mine in, Colonel/’ she cried, as soon as he appeared :	we	want	you

here most amazingly, to explain all these engravings, and some Irish poems: for here are the books you mentioned; and my bookseller has sent me besides every thing he could collect on the subject of your interesting country.’’ (VDonnel took his place at the table: the ladies drew round him; and in this enviable and distinguished situation he was discovered by Lord Charles Sa.-vi 11, who had advanced some steps into the room before he perceived O’Don-uel on the other side of the table.

“ You are just come in time, Lord Chari es, to be amazingly am used/’ said Lady Llanbens: but before she finished what she meant to add, Lord Charles had left the room: and Lady Llauberis, too much engrossed with

ifa^/i-ayart/YFumuli,and round towers,

O O	y

sca?gely perceived his exit, and made no comment on.its abruptness. Before, however, she had got quite through Grose’s plates, she began to yawn, and had more than once gone as far as— “ Come, this is very good/’ when the dressing-bell released her; and the little society of the dressing-room broke up. As they passed along the galley leading to their several apartments, the Duchess observed in a low voice to CBDonnel : “If Lord Charles Savill is ever elected President to the Antiquarian Society, I do not think he will readity consent to your admission into it; for it strikes me he was not particularly pleased at our learned little body resolving itself into a committee, in the Countess’sdressing-room, and making you its chairman.”

“ What reason has your Grace to suppose so?” asked O’Donnel. But she only smiled, and entered her dressing-room, without making any reply. O'Donnel

idly ; for he too lvad been struck by the sudden retreat of Lord Charles Savill, and still more by the expression of his countenance; for when he had raised his head at his entrance, their eyes had met full, and O’Donnel had read there more than he would be justified in noticing; yet something, which he longed Lord Charles would transfer from his eyes to his lips, and thus giving it a less questionable form,, enable him to meet it as it merited.

From OVDormel’s first arrival at Lonçlands. Lord Charles had treated

o	*

him with a marked coldness, which at least indicated repugnance ; and whether he conversed with Lady Llanberis or the Duchess, or received the civilities of the Miss Carlisles, or of the passing female visitants, to whom Lady Llanberis presented him, the supercilious looks of Lord Charles still pursued him ; hastily withdrawn, indeed, when the eyes of O’Donnel met

liis, but always accompanied by a smile chat indicated irony, if not absolute derision. It was, however, a delicate point to call a man to an account for looks and smiles ; O’Donnel therefore waited with more patience and temper than naturally belonged to his impetuous character, for some less equivocal proof of his Lordship’s tendency to insult.

In the evening, as the gentlemen stood round the fire, taking liqueur after coffee, Lady Llanberis resumed the subject of the Irish antiquities, and again assured Lord Charles that he had had a great loss in not remaining in her dressing-room.

“ Credat judaeus!*’ replied Lord Charles, smiling sarcastically.

“ What do you mean by that, Lord Charles ?” asked Lady Llanberis, ea-gerly.

“Nothing,” said Lord Charles, drily, “ but that I am not over credulous

rtt -t 4- L n t-'v a /if 4- e't li /i i 7 i vi /v» f It n f i n ï P Vi ^ ^

“ 11 a s y o u r L o r d s h i p a n y défi nife meaning attached to your words?'* asked O’Don -nel, in a tone equally significant.

“ I believe, Sir/' said Lord Charles, haughtily, “ I am not bound particularly to account to you for the meaning of any words I may utter.”

“ No further/' answered O’Donnel, than as one gentleman is bound to another, to do away any unpleasant impression, which words, casually spoken, may, from a wrong inference, have made on his mind.”

What Lord Charles meant to have replied, if he meant to have replied at all, was lost by the sudden diversion of his attention from O’Donnel to his own personal safety, and the injury sustained by one of his very handsome legs ; for the Duchess, with a startling scream, let fall a cup of hot tea, and, not only spoiled for ever her own spotless white satin dress, but scalded Lord Charles’s instep sufficiently to

æuu get i& aujumug uiiiwu un ueiuic the skin adhered to it. He retired to the door, followed by the Duchess and Lady Llanberis ; the latter lamenting that he could not skate for a walk ; the former deploring and apologizing for the accident, holdingout her own dripping gown, and exclaiming against Mr. Frederick Carlisle as the real author of the accident, whose elbow, she said, “ had come in contact with mine, because he would stand in an attitude— so.’* Here her close imitation, not only • of Mr. Carlisle’s attitude, but even of his canvassing look for admiration, glanced furtively from under the eyes, threw Lady Llanberis into a violent fit of laughter, and had the effect of restoring the merriment of the whole party, which Lady Llanberis’s observation to Lord Charles had for a moment interrupted. Her Grace and her nephew returned almost at the same mo»

VQL. III.	C

!

V IV Hiv I Will , JJU1 U VMKU K O 1I11J|/ —

ing with his leg tit?cl up, while the Duchess, with her spoiled satin exchanged fora plain white muslin dress, and a veil thrown round her, entered with a wild and frantic look, and sung the mad song-in “ Nina pazza” with great effect, to the surpiize and amusement of the "whole company : then suddenly changing her countenance and air, she succeeded still better in a btojfa* in the style and jargon of a Sicilian peasant.

Ladv Llauberis was in raotures ; and so

%/ *

often assured Lord Charles that all this was done to conciliate him, and make amends for the accident, that he at last seemed not only to credit the fact, but to he gratified by the intention. This was indeed the first symptom of conciliation which his plebeian, but unbending aunt, had ever paid him ; and as inordinate vanity is as easily soothed as it is readiiy wc unded, he was not incre-

üuious ro me assertions wnicu iea ana flattered the dominant passion of his nature.

Mr. Frederick Carlisle was then called for his amende honorable ; and though mortified and piqued even into low spirits by the Duchess's accurate imitation of his affected peculiarities, yet he could not resist the opportunity of exhibiting. With very little pressing, therefore, he suffered himselfto be prevailed on_, and performed a number of harlequinadetricks and attitudes, which he concluded by vaulting over a sola table_, and coming down on the other ' side in the position of a cobler at his work,, and singing Jobson’s ballad,

“ He that has the best wife, Szc.'3 The. room rang with applauses, and the evening concluded with the greatest good-humor and gaiety. Lady Llau-beris, from the variety of the exhibitions, had not one pause allowed her for a yawn, and in the fervor of her de-

, c 2

Jignt, sue coum noiieiram irum say mg . 66 Well, Duchess, if you had not scalded poor Lord Charles’s leg, I must say that your spilling the tea wâs a most lucky accident. You have broken my Dresden cup all to pieces, but I would give twenty Dresden cups for one such evening as this.*’

O’Donnel alone had felt neither pleasure nor gratification from this eventful evening, and before the Duchess had begun her faff a song, he had. left the drawing-room, and retired to his own apartment with feelings of the most unqualified discomfort. lie almost regretted his hastiness to Lord Charles, and his having given way to the powerful feeling of the moment. Yet to go on longer under the same roof with a man who evidently considered him with suspicion, if not with a more invidious sentiment ; to feel the influence of looks and eyes, and yet to be scarcely justified in noticing

their unequivocal expressions; was a state scarcely endurable to one whose pride was but too prompt to take offence, and whose spirit was not always regulated by prudence, or tempered by reflection. He therefore resolved on taking an early'opportunity of leaving Longlands, and, waving any further, ceremony with respect to Lady Llan-heris’s secret, he determined on mentioning his suspicion of her liberality on the following daV, and, if possible,, on bringing her to the point so long desired by him, and so long protracted by her.

In these resolutions, Lord Charles was not alone the person who took a part. The Duchess of Belmont’s conduct had thoroughly (it was a strong term, but he repeated it to himself) disgusted h\m. [1er evident attempts to adulate Lord Charles, the moment after she had witnessed what had passed between them, and had heard his pointed expression of contempt for her country5 of

which some portion must necessarily fall upon herself; the extravagance of her exhibitions, far beyond what lie had before seen her attempt ; and even her ridiculous mimicry of Mr, Car-lisle, the last person on whom she ought to have exerted lier dangerous

talent, overthrew everv sentiment of

7 %>

prepossession which he had conceived in her favor. He felt that he never could again seek her society, nor be seduced by her pleasantry and conversational powers. Yet that enjoyment lost, what was there to detain him longer at this splendid villa, or to render it preferable to his own solitary and obscure lodging in London ? There, at least, his time was his own ; and there he was neither constrained to be amused, expected to be gay, nor condemned to be happy in spite of every reason to be otherwise. It was also self-evident that he was not in any respect calculated for the meridian of

the society to which he was attached. With modes of thinking as strong as his feelings were acute and his spirits susceptible, he was continually risking beyond some landmark of prevailing opinion ; starting a cherished prejudice, or treading upon a darling prepossession.' Neither did he possess exhibiting talents of any description, so necessary in contributing to the levy which the indolent and the rich are perpetually raising upon the spirits and exertions of all who are admitted to their community. Prompt, as qualified, to bear his part in an enlightened . and liberal conversation, upon whatever point it turned, he shrunk from being at all times en spectacle, either as actor or auditor. He could not feign a leap nor force an attitude ; he could neither grind knives with his teeth, nor play the shcrt-armed orator ; and^ added to all these deficiencies, he hated 44 hot cockles ;J> disliked 44 blind man’s

buffand played with so little success at “ four corners,0 that he was sure to be left fool in the middle whenever he attempted it.

On the following morning, as O’Don-nel was crossing through the hall from the breakfast-room to the saloon, iu search of Lady Llanberis, to execute the resolves of the preceding night, he perceived her Ladyship and the Duchess leaning over the balustrade of the gallery above, in earnest conversation.

cf Stay, stay. Colonel O’Donnel,” cried the Countess; t£ you are the person in the world I want to speak to and she hurried down with her hands full of letters. “ Come into the saloon/1 she said ; tl I have something particular to say to you/1

O’Donnel followed her.

Now, Colonel O’Donnel,” she said laughingly, “ will you answer me a simple question ?”

44 Certainly., Madam,” he replied in some emotion ; 44 if I can.”

ct Has Lady Singleton, or has she not, turned traitress ?”

44 What does your Ladyship mean ?”

44 Has she, or has she not, betrayed to you a little secret I entrusted to her keeping, and in which you are involved ?’’

44 IS ever, Madam, never, at least directly or intentionally, upon my honor; but I have> partly by accident, partly by inference, been led to suspect that there was a secret, that—”

He paused for a moment, felt for the two thousand pound bills, and hesitated whether he would not at once cut the matter short, and without further observation, return the money into her hands.

44 Come/' said the Countess, 41 I

N

see you know all ; and, indeed, Ï meant long since to have talked to you about it, but I have been so

hurried and engaged by all the tiresome people that have been here, that it quite went out of my head, till a letter from your friend., Lady Single-ton, this morning, lias rendered me more anxious than ever to complete the business, for many reasons which I will mention to you : but first tell me, are you satisfied with-—”

“ Satisfied !” interrupted O’Donnel in some agitation, and drawing the letter and its inclosures from his pocket. Ci Satisfied is a cold word : but while I offer your Ladyship my sincere, my grateful acknowledgments, I trust you will suffer me to decline, not your good-will, but the medium through which it flows—in a word,

Madam-------”

et Navff interrupted Lady Llanberis,

1	i	./	•

eagerly, ft 1 did not mean to dictate: I acted only in conformity to the character given of you by Lady Single-ton: her description of you altogether,

•n a word, it struck me that nature herself had intended you for 4 un rot distingue;’ and I thought it was but just that our hero should—-”

44 Nay, indeed, Lady Llanberis,” said O’Donnel, confused, yet smiling at her new enthusiasm in his favor:

44 I cannot hear you further ; your Ladyship and Lady Singleton have both been most kind, most flattering, and—5’

4! Not the least of it,” said Lady Llanberis ; and the fact is, I shall consider vour refusal as mere false modesty, false delicacy ; you can start no reasonable objection r in short/’ she added, with some symptoms of . humour, 44 I am not much in the habit of being refused when I stoop to solicit, and before you decide, I think you had better consider a little, for your rejection will do me a very serious injury, and render abortive all that I have been working at for these two months.”

O’Donnel, equally distressed and astonished, exclaimed :—

44 Good God ! how can my refusal or acceptance be of any moment to your Ladyship, further than as youi1* generous feelings in my favor'. .

4r Why,” interrupted Lady Llan-beris, 44 it breaks up all my scheme, and disappoints all my triumphs, over a person who is most justly and de-» servedly odious to me.”

44 You amaze me,” said O’Donnel.

44 Jt is nevertheless true,” added Lady Llanberis; 44 and therefore it was necessary the whole should be kept secret till all was ready beyond the chance of disappointment; nor had I any confidant in the whole plan but Lady Singleton and Lord Charles. The person to whom I alluded,” she continued, 44 is a Lady Loton, a creature of yesterday ; whom before she became a personage 1 happened to treat a little de haute en bas, and since she

has become the wife of that Cresus,

that old nabob, Sir Samuel Loton, who

got his money in India—Heaven knows

how ! she has endeavoured to pay me

back—not, however, in kind—there I

defy her insignificance; but by ruining

herself to annoy me. You know how

people are led in London by dinners,

and suppers, and lions, and cham-

paigne, and all that sort of thing-; and

this Pagoda Lady has so timed her good

things to come in opposition to mine,

that she actually, last season, emptied

my rooms twice in one month, and

carried off some of mv.best men from

%/

my opera suppers. Well, this is not all: last autumn her foolish old husband, at her instigation, bought Lord S—*s beautiful villa when he went to Germany. Now this villa is only five miles distance from Longlands; and when the report got about that I meant to fill my house at Christmas, and ask some amusing people here,

slip instantly gave out that site meant to have private theatricals, some of Moliere’s 4 petits piecesfor she has an émigré, a kind of ami de famille, such as it is the fashion to have now, who is the first comic actor in the world, the Chevalier St. Ange; and they were to commence with an English tragedy and Its Precieuses Ridicules for a farce. She had, however, a theatre to buikb and I was determined to meet her in her own way : in a word, mv theatre is nearly finished, and Iter’s is not roofed ; and before she can bring out her Tamerlane and French farce, L shall have represented my Zaire, and mij English farce; for I have cast all the parts myself, and have gotten them written out. YV e have now a fortnight before us : we may be all ready for the first rehearsal by this day se’nnight, and on that day week we may perform. to Lady Loton’s surprize and confusion, and the astonishment of ail the world, for

I shall ask all the world. Still, however, 1 was not certain of my Zaire till this post, though Lady Singleton has been intriguing the business for me this

O o

month back ; for my Zaire, no other than the once famous Comtesse de Pompeignan, whose Theatre de Société was the first thing of its kind in Paris, and who, though rather too old for pour tendre Zaire, is still a delicious actress. Now the Chevalier St. Ange is the cher ami of Madame de Pompeignan, as well as the ami de la maison with Lady Loton ; and though these ladies are the greatest friends in the world, yet there are constant .little fracas between them, of which the poor dear Chevalier (himself no chicken) is the subject. Lady Singleton has been in the neighborhood with them all, and has played her part so well, that, on a late quarrel between the two rival queens, she has actually carried off Zaire with her to town, engaged her in

our schemes, and set her at eternal war with her Chevalier and her false friend, who is young and pretty enough to excuse the Chevalier’s desertion, that is certain. We are to have both ladies Here in a few days, and Madame de Pompeignan is already aware that she is to have the handsomest Gros-viane in the world ; for, in fact, as Lady Singleton said to me, when we first wrote to you, the part seemed written on purpose, as if Voltaire had you in

his eve at the time.—Stay, here are all

%/ %/ '

your parts, and here is my little bill of fare: you will perceive that I have in-listed some emigres too as well as Lady

O	^

Loton : Î am to send the carriage for them to Lady Singleton, who is to get me a whole batch. 1 have cast the play so :—

Orosmanc -	Colonel O’Oonncl.

Luisignan » -	-	• - Chevalier dc .Fours.

Nercstan............M. de Mercœur.

Chevaliers francois - - Messrs. Carlisles,

Fatinae -	Lady	Singleton.

Zaire ------ Mad. de Pompeignan.

DEVIL TO PAY.

Sir John Loverule - - - Sir Gilbert S. for he has a sweet little voice, and you know it’s a poor part.

Jobson - Mr. F. Carlisle. •

He will be delightful.

Butler - - Mr. Carlisle.

Footman - The Duke of Belmont, and so on.

“ Well, here is your part, written out by Florio; and if you have nothing better to do, suppose you walk to the hr grove and look at my theatre, and try your voice. I have given a thousand orders about the sounding board. Do you remember—

64 Je veux avec excès vous aimer et vous plaire V*

“ You little thought then you were giving me a specimen of your dramatic powers ; so you see your refusal of the premier role comes too late.31

£	v	/	IJ \ J ~ li U .

Her ! ladyship having now presented the written part to her hero, was gliding away,, but O’Donnel, who, from the length of her speed), had time to

O	I

recover gradually from his astonish-

C?	«

nicsit, followed her, and entreated another moment of her attention.

a Well,” she returned, u it must he only a moment, for I am now going to the Carlisles, to set them to work at /he Devil to Pay.'3

44 May 1 then,” said O’Donne], 44 beg to know if your Ladyship ever did me the honor to write to me upon any other subject to Ireland than that of a mere invitation to your villa?”

No/’ said Lady IJanberis, 44 never. Why do you ask ? 1 even cautioned Lady Singleton not to mention a word in her letter of the plays, but merely to request the pleasure of your company at Longlands, for, independent of Oyos-mane, i had an amazing curiosity to see you. I assure you 1 consider you as

a genuine Irish Chief; and what Lady Singleton told me about your being kidnapped in your youth, and confined in the Castle of Dublin, rendered you most amazingly interesting/5

O’Donnel, little as he was disoosed

'	i

to be amused, could not help smiling at this identifying of himself with “ O’Donnel the lied ;55 but as the eager Lady was again hurrying away, he again followed her, and putting the letter he had received into her hand with the bills, begged to know if that was her seal,

44 No,” said Lady Llanberis, reading the motto: 44 but it is an amazing pretty device. I will have a seal cut after it directly: it is really extremely ingenious: will you give me leave?” and tearing off the seal, she glided a\vav>

O	7	~	»/

repeating the Italian motto to herself.

O’ Dotinel - sto xl motionless where she had left him, holding his French-

part in his hand, more bewildered., more to seek than ever. It was impossible to mistake Lady LlanberisVs manner, and it was as impossible not to feel that he had hitherto wholly mistaken her character, it was evident that he was simply the object of a caprice, the instrument of a scheme, and that he had no further interested her feelings in his favor, than in as much as he had excited her curiosity,

v *

or amused her imagination; and it was clear, that, though pleased, as she was misled, by the account of the kidnapped chief, she had neither sympathy nor interest for the unfortunate gentleman.

The approach of some one towards the door opposite to that near which he stood hurried him away ; and he had already reached his own room before he discovered that he had not picked up his letter and bills, which Lady Llanberis had carelessly let fall, with

her wonted giddiness, when she tore off the seal ; and that he now only held in his hand the written part of Grosmane.

In some trepidation, he hurried back to the saloon, and was equally mortified • and surprized to see the Duchess of Belmont standing where he had stood

a fe\v minutes before, and holding the

/

envelope of his letter in one hand, and one of the bills between the finger and thumb of the other.

“ Oh! oh!” she said., “you are the careless person then, Colonel C Don-nel, who flings his thousand pound notes about as if they were blank paper: there, take it: I read your claims in your countenance, and have read nothing else, I assure you.” And she presented him the letter and the bill. £S Don’t be frightened,” she added sportively ; f4 I have only this moment picked it up: 'tis all safe. But pray be more cautious in future;

cold, pausing caution, to he sure, is not the virtue of an /.ere, and ha-t of all of such a hero as le grand Gros-' mane'*

O’Donnel started and colored. The Duel less was just where she had been in his estimation the night be-fore ; he was not, therefore, much disposed to be amused by her pleasantry, and still less was he disposed to become the but or object of her ridicule. He was about at once to deny all knowledge of the part assigned him by Lady Lianberis, till a few minutes back, when the Duchess interrupted him, saying : —-

“ The Countess has just told me all, Colonel, and i quite agree 'with lier, that you are the very figure for the ‘ superbe Orosisane:* yes, there is ( ec bras puissantf cet aimable front, que t’a gloire environne

O’Donnel was turning away, hut the Duchess detained him.

iN ayj you must not go ior a minute or two/* she said. “ ï am so full of tins French play, i can think and talk of nothing else. You have no idea how much I admire private theatricals; but your Zaire-—what a Zaire they have given you ! poor Madame de Pompeig-nan ! Thirty years ago she was the heroine of her own theatre, and the worst of it is, the play you know opens so—

a Je vc m'attendais pas, Jeune et belle Zaire."

Now, vanity apart, 1 think 1 should have played it better. Stay, i’ll just give you a specimen and placing herself opposite to him, after a moment's pause, and with an instantaneous and extraordinary change of man-ner and countenance, she addressed herself to O’Donne!, in the tender expressions of the devoted Zaire.

<e Helas j’aurais voulu qu’a vos vertus unie Et îoeprisaut pour vous, les troues de l’asic,

Seule, et dans un desert arec mon Epour , J’eusse pû sous mes pieds les fouler avec vous.”

“Good [leavens !” exclaimed O’Don-nel, while his imagination was thrown into disorder by the exquisite, the almost passionate feeling of the Duchess’s voice and manner : cc Good Heavens ! what an actress vou are !”

lt Well,” she said, recovering her usual tone, tf I told you so---but my merits are here wholly overlooked ; and instead of the Christian heroine of the French tragedy, I am destined to play the cobler’s wife in the English farce : and she began to hum, with great taste and playfulness,

u Of late I was a coblcr’s wife.”

“ Then your Grace,” said O’D on* riel, pleased and detained against his better reason—44 your Grace really means to perform ?”

44 To be sure/' she replied, ft and don't you ?’*

44 Me! ' said O’Donnel---4' You cannot seriously suppose it/’

44 Indeed i do suppose and believe it most seriously, and truly,’! said the Duchess: 44 how can I doubt it, when }7ou have come six hundred miles on Lady Singleton's invitation, for the express purpose ? for this, as 1 learnt from our noble hostess this morning, was the 4 wind, of which you were the sport/ and which blew you into those 4 Halcyon seasyou talked of one day.”

O’Donnel now, more to exculpate himself from so ludicrous an imputation, and to escape being the subject of one of her humorous Grace's good stories, than from any desire to make a confidant where he almost feared an enemy, candidly confessed the motive which led him to seek the Countess's acquaintance, and to accept her invitation to Longlands, alleging the fact of his visit to England being merely the

VOL. III.	D

result of liis own situation and affairs ; and his never having received the invitations she alluded to, which he had reason to believe did not reach Ireland till he had left it.

44 And this then,’* said the Duchess,

. '	emphatically,	66	is	your knowledge of

human nature: and after having lived f where bells have tolled to church/ in great cities and in great courts, you have yet to learn, that those who go furthest for their own gratification, are those who move least to promote the good of others; that extravagance of conduct holds no inseparable connection with liberality of sentiment; and that, what is vu Dari v called a *ood heart, is as inferior to a right mind, as instinct is to reason, and impulse to principle. But to quit this ton d'ex-orde. --Since Lady Llanberis is not the invisible deity, who showers her ill-bestowed benefits on you, have you no suspicion who is

IN O R 6 111. tilvi WO 11 LI 5	it/llii lieu

O’Donnel. Why should anyone suppose I wanted the money ? or why should any one suspect that I would accept so large a sum, coming in so questionable a way ?—a sum which plight be reclaimed when I was least able to return it ; and by one, perhaps, from whom 1 should shrink to be pbliged.”

44 Nay,” said the Duchess, 44 I dare say you suspect the whole transaction to be the act of some foolish, inconsiderate woman, who, without rhime or reason, would do that and more, pour Vamour de vos beaux yeux.'3

O’Donnel raised his eyes to the Duchess’s, and was hurt beyond the power of concealing his mortification at the look of irony which beamed in them.

“ I am not,” he said-in a quick tone, 44 quite the consummate coxcomb your

Grace seems to suppose, and------39

“ Ah! there he is/’ interrupted

D 2

the Duchess, with a dramatic air. “ Le superbe Orosmane/ Well, 1 beg pardon ; but the fact is, I have a sort of a feeling of old acquaintanceship with you, which leads me to take these little liberties. It is now 1 think more than two years since we first met ; and though your notice was neither very marked, nor very flattering, yet whileyou were cultivating an intimacy with Lady Florence’s eyes, Goody-two-Shoes was making an acquaintance with you; for those who ran might read : the style, though high-flown, was clear enough.

tc Lady Florence’s eyes, and Goody-two-Shoes !” repeated O’Donnel, half pleased, half vexed, at Lady Llanbe-ris’s treachery, and at once amused, softened, and flattered, in spite of himself.

u Aye, Lady Florence’s eyes,” returned the Duchess. “ That woman knows you all. She piques your self-love at the first set out; and she judge*

by experience, that all the rest will follow of course. Now, that is the very spirit of the laws of coquetry, and ail the rest is mere verbiage. But the truth is, Lady Florence’s attentions did touch you. Colonel, and home too —you know they did. You were caught, not by admiring, but by being admired/’

“ The attentions of any woman would touch me home,” replied O’Don-nel, warmly; tc and I will not answer for the extravagance to which the attentions of some women might drive me. But Lady Florence would be as little likely to produce that effect as any other cold and self-possessed woman, who through all her fascination clearly shews that she lives only for the gratification of her own vanity.’*

“ Indeed !*’ said the Duchess, drily. “ You like then to find a woman as the Parisian gourmand liked to find his goose, ausi tendre que Zaire ”

O’Donnel could not help laughing at the ridicule of the image.

“ Well,'* said the Duchess, rising from the chair on which she had seated herself during the conversation, all I can say is, since you have .honored me with your confidence, that 1 think you had better advertise these troublesome notes, as things lost or mislaid, stolen or strayed ; or lay them by for -the present, till called for by the right owner: for since, as the French song says, 4 on ne donne rien pour rien/ when nothing comes of it; and it is seen that you have not had the tender intention to discover who rectify is the benefactress, the money will perhaps be reclaimed, and given to some more grateful and quick-sighted object:—-meantime, however, observe, that Madam de Pompeignan will be here to

meet her Orosmane, so vou had better

' %/

Set about your part.”

“ So very little idea,” be replied,

44 have I of playing any part here3 that 1 mean to return to town to-morrow.” The Duchess turned back, with some surprise marked in her countenance.

44 Indeed !” she said with earnestness. 44 Return so soon to London ! Why Lady Llanberis has just told me that you have promised to remain here for three weeks, certain, and as much longer as vou could. She counts oil

x/

you, and____in short, you must not go;

for you cannot tell her that you will not stay, because she did not send you two thousand pounds: though, if that is your price, and you will not remain a stalling under, why, I can answer for her, that sooner than lose her Ovos-

-mar.e-----’’

44 1 perceive,j5 interrupted O’Dou-nel, with some humor, 44 there is but one aspect of things for your Grace, and that is the ridiculous/5

44 To be serious then/5 said the Duchess—44 which is the only ridiculous

thing after all, if you are only driven away bv the fear of being dragooned into the part of an hero, you may trust me, that your compliance will never be put to the test. For persons of Lady Llanberis’s class there are no meditated pleasures: with them, 4 nothing pleasclh but rare accident.3 The amusement long planned is seldom attained ; the scheme long contrived is rarely realized : the sickbed imagination droops over its own reiterated dreams: the mind, satiated by the facility with which its devices are accomplished, loses its spring, and foregoes its object ; and when the strong excitements of doubt and hope, and solicitude and impatience, cease to play upon the exhausted spirits ; when the intrigue and the manœuvre, the obstacle and the difficulty, are all at an end—the charm is over, and weariness or disgust takes its place; and thus, in a word, by the time the theatre is finished, the parts

filled, and all bids fair for speedy representation, why then, I will venture to affirm, that the whole thing falls to the ground. If, therefore, you should behold the theatre turned into a chapel of ease, or the petits loges into dovecotes, and you should express your astonishment at the transformation, her Ladyship would coolly answer you, with Seasmareile—4 0/ nous avo7is

O

changé tout cela !y So far, therefore, you need have no apprehensions. But still, if you are weary of this place; if business calls; or pleasure awaits you in London ; in that case*-----

44 No, Madam,'” returned O’Donnel, insensibly pleased by the serious and friendly tone she had assumed---;4 neither pleasure nor business recall me to London, which is in fact to me a desert.

44 I am at present in a state of sus-penseful expectation about letters from the continent, which may, or may not? arrive in a week or ten days ; and 1

cannot take any decided step in the business which brought me to England till I receive them—yet, still, why should 1 remain—-to what purpose---for what object?’’ and he sighed pro-fou ndly.

“ Nay/’ she said, in a tone of some hesitation, “ if, indeed, you have no

inducement to remain-----’’

“ Perhaps/’ he returned, smiling, “ after all, 1 want rather an excuse than an inducement.”

u If that is all/’ she replied gaily, “ / will give you an excuse. Suppose I desire vou to stay.”

4/

“ I fear/’ said O’Donnel, half inclined, yet half afraid, to credit the expression of her countenance ; ct 1 fear my imagination will not go so far.”

“ Come then,” said the Duchess, tc we will leave supposition aside, and call obedience into action. 1 command you to remain” she added, imperiously.

“ Indeed i” returned O’D nine! with animation : “ then you shall be obeyed. But remember, that to command obedience, is to imply protection ; and that in our’s, as in all bonds of aliegi-ance, the sovereign and the subject stand respectively committed.”

“ Well, well,” said the Duchess, moving towards tiie door, “ I will protect you, i f t/iatbe all : but,” she added, turning suddenly rounds “ I must do it in future at a cheaper rate than I did last night; for really I cannot afford a white satin gown in your defence every lime you mount your griffin as the champion of your country, and cry,.

‘ Hoia- tbere---0’Donnel for Ireland,, against St. George of England !”

O	O	o

“ What docs }rour Grace mean asked O’ Donne! anxiously.

“ Why, I mean that poor Mr. Carlisle was as innocentas a cherub of the fall of my tea-cup, though I so cruelly 4 shook the fabric of his folly/ and teha*t

at the expence of my dear nephew’s instep, and my own pretty new gown.

1 stopt short the 4 keen encounter of your wits/ and perhaps prevented some other ( keen encounters; for all the rest of my fooleries during the remainder of the evening went to the self-same time and tune: and thus, perhaps, 1 imperceptibly diverted feelings, which more serious and more obvious efforts would neither have soothed nor controlled . but observe, that, as you respect the vow of allegiance, now pledged, I charge you not to throw yourself at Lord Charles’s head, because he refuses to believe that Fiiirma-corl was nine feet high, or because, when he in-' tends to smile, by an unhappy mistake of nature’s, he seems only to sneer. Dear Lord Chanes is.the least in the

world of an___but as he is my nephew,

___I’ll tell von more another time.”

She was now gliding away, when O’Donnel following her a few steps3

with a thousand reproaches knocking at his heart, took the end of her scarf, as if to detain her.

“ Well,” she said, “ have you anything to say ?*’

“ Much,” he returned in emotion: and he involuntarily kissed the drapery he still held : yet, as he remained silent, the Duchess gently drew away her scarf, and went off singing :

Of late I was a cobler’s wifen-”

♦

CHAPTER 20

Notwithstanding Lady Llanberis had imposed silence on O Donne!, with respect to the French plays, he found after dinner, when the servants had withdrawn, that every member of the society had shared a confidence which he had believed almost confined to himself. Most of the party had walked to the fir grove, and had been permitted to look at the theatre ; and Mr. Carlisle had ventured to efface the monosyllable no from the inscription over the "ate. Nothin" else but the

O	O

plays were talked of during the early part of the evening, till Lady Llanberis h »rself changed the subject, of which she was grown weary, by crying, 16 Come, this is all very well ; but

really one cannot go on ringing the changes upon the same tune eternally : one would soon grow weary even of private theatricals, if one is to hear nothing else from morning to night.”

The Duchess threw an intelligent look at O'Donne], who, with this encouragement, approached her, notwithstanding she was still in conversation with the Duke : at the same moment,, however, Lady Llanberis called to the latter, 44 Come, Duke, 1 must tear you from La belie tante : we have not had any brag since last you were at Longlands, and Ï have promised Lord Charles to make up a table.”

The Duke rose out of one arm chair, and threw himself into another, and the brag table was made up.

44 That is an excellent person,” said the Duchess to O'Donnel, as he took the vacated seat by her: 44 but he nevertheless reminds me continually of

the sleepy man, in Queen Ann’s reign, who slept for show, and who in the syllabus of his somniferous performances detailed, that the Jifst hoar he yawned,, the second grew drowsy, the third dosed, and so on. But of such beings, in their various modifications, is supreme bon-ton by profession composed. This, however, by no means includes, in its rigorously drawn circle, all the rank of the country/'

“ From the specimens I have seen . abroad of your nobility/* said O’Don-nel, “ 1 have conceived that the English aristocracy was not only the most dignified, but the most enlightened of Europe, partaking fully with the people in the blessings which flow from a wrell understood liberty. But it is still but too true, that the society which your Grace calls bon-ton by profession3 is distinguished by a languor, which, in

CJ	v

the Parisian circles of my day, would have passed for mere dullness, and

would have proved infinitely tiresome and monotonous to a nation whose constitutional vivacity gave a natural and unforced life and spirit to their social intercourse; for, after all, much of that, which is attributed to the influence of th ^morale ought more properly to be ascribed to constitution; and I cannot but think that those causes, which idealists deem subaltern and inferior, have, in fact, a primary influence upon the springs of intellect (about which so much is said, and so little understood,) and accelerate or retard their play, by means but too mechanical.”

“ Possibly,’* said the Duchess; “ but whatever be the cause, nothing can be more contrasted than the effects. Conversation here is a dull game of chess, carried on by slow moves, and deliberated checks, while the Parisian makes it a game of shuttlecock, by the lively bounding and rebounding of opi-

iiion ; the aro'iiment thrown lightly to

1 Î	s..	%!

unc.1 fro, caught and returned with equal ease and dexterity, and droptat* last accidentally, before either of the players are weary of the contest.”

f‘ This is, indeed, the true theory of society,0 said O'Dounel. “ i wish vour <^race would become the founder of a sect, by preaching it, which might put the quietism of bon-ton to sleep, and

u Quench the zeal of all professors else.5’

Here the entrance of two young gentlemen, whom O’Donne! had not before seen at Lonskuuls, cave another turn to the conversation. The strangers advanced into the room, arm in arm, with looks of the most solemn gravity. They were received by Lady Lianberis with a cordial welcome, while they bestow.d a silent shake of the hand to some of the men, and a cold nod of the head to a few of the women.

“ Pray observe,” said the Duchess,

44 those two young men, who, like Rosencrantz and GuildensPern, move together, with measured steps, and looks of mutual intelligence. It is rather a late hour for their arrival; but you will find their tardy movements are, some way or other, connected with the fate of the nation.”

Lady Llanberis now reproached them for not coming to dinner; and one of them replied, f< The house sat so late/'

“ There—I knew it/’ said the Duchess. 44 But what do you think they said in the house ?— nothing. They have never opened their lips in it since they made their maiden speeches. All maiden speeches are splendid things, and make a great noise in—the particular circle of the speaker; but these gen* tlemon are among those termed rising young men; and their maiden speeches placed them at once above the common roll of legislators. Great hopes are enter-

tained of them, and doubtless you will soon see them high ministerial characters, each of them at the head of some important department of the government.”

“ But with all due deference to their precocity/’ said O’Donnel, laughing, “ I should imagine, since political sagacity does not, like reading and writing, come by nature, that their youth would for a little time stand in the way of their preferment.”

Quite the reverse,” said the Du-? chess: “ the old maxim, of young warriors and old statesman, is long since gone by. It is no longer necessary to reach power by the laborious gradations of public service, nor is a knowledge of the constitution the preliminary for obtaining distinction in the senate. We take, therefore, our Cecils from the forms, and our Harleys from the universities. As far, however, as this experiment has yet gone,£ 1 here’s

never any of these demure boys come to any proof,’ as Falstaff says.’*

“Butdo all your demure boys,” asked O’Donnel, “ wear this solemn air and thoughtful brow, in which men read strange things?”

“ Yes,” said the Duchess, “all; and they speak too in diplomatic mystery with ‘ ?iods and becks, but not with 4 wreathed smilesoh ! no.

u Seldom they smile, or smile in such a sort, As if they mocked their spirits, that could be Moved to smile at any thing.”

“This, however/’ said O’Donne), 66 was not, I believe, the youth of the Burkes, the Foxes, and the Sheridans, nor even of the Sullys* or the Colberts.”

* The Duc de Sully was not a very young diplomatist when he danced in a ballet, at a court christening. 1 believe the juvenile politician of our present days never outsteps the gravity of a waltz.

“ No, no/’said the Duchess: 44 the star which arose so hriyhtly on the horizon of their lives, kindling while it guided, and sometimes perhaps dazzling while it illuminated, sheds no influence on these, ourj wise men of the east/ and if therefore they should in the end prove fallible, that/ cannot plead that

tc The l'sht which led astray was lisdit from

O	s	Z>

heaven.”

ct Talking of lig/tts which lead

r?	o

astraysaid O* Donne!, 44 1 have not been able to ascertain by what means your Grace has preserved your lustre in a sphere so likely to dull it; or how, with so much natural brilliancy, you have yet attained to such supreme bon-ton.’'

44 You mistake ; I am not bon-don. We Pamelas, who make a step over half-a-dozen ranks of society, to repose ourselves on a red bench, and set the world staring to know how we havegot

there, are never supreme hon-ton : no, we are at best but the fashion : we are for a time shewn about, and followed and gazed at ; and we exhibit and are exhibited ; and, after all, are but the fashion. This is a poor distinction, for any one may be the fashion, but what fashion is, how procured, or how retained,’ tis impossible to say :

u ’Tis something,nothing ; ’twas your’s, ’tis mine, And has been slaves to thousands.”

Bon-ton, on the contrary, is less an accidental endowment, and more a prescriptive right. To be legitimately , bon-ton, one should be high-born, apathetic, and reserved; constitutionally cold, and habitually silent ; talked of by many, known to a few, devoted to none, and ennuyé by all. In a word, vou must be what Lord Charles Savill is, and what the Dalai Lama is supposed to be—a thing absorbed in itself, and perpetually engaged in the contemplation of its own divinity.

CHAPTER 21

On the following- morning Lady Llanheris communicated the contents of a letter to the company assembled at breakfast, which from the excessive satisfaction it appeared to afford, presented her in a new and amiable light to O’Donnel. % The letter was from her son, and dated off	She	had

not heard from him for some time, and now received the unexpected, and apparently most welcome intelligence of his immediate return. Although O’Donnel had frequently heard her speak of Iter son with great affection, yet as his going abroad was entirely against her will, she had always mingled some little bitterness in her ex-

picSOlUIlo Ui llictlCilJal HJIIUUa^ss. XJ.CJ

was now, however, returning sooner by six months than she expected, and, what much added to her joy and satisfaction, he was bringing over with him a Greek servant, an Egyptian fire-eater, and an Indian juggler. She would not hear any other subject mentioned or discussed but what bore upon the return of this prodigal son, and his imported natural curiosities.

Another event, which occurred on the following day, gave an additional subject of occupation and interest U$-her Ladyship. Lord Edward Savill, brother to the late, and uncle to the present Duke of Belmont, was seized with a dangerous illness, and an express had been dispatched for Lord Charles, whom he had made his heir. The two noble brothers, therefore, left Longlands together for Northumberland, where Lord Edward then was at his own seat: and Lady yol. in.	e.

j-juiiiuciis, always pieasea oy H new and unexpected event, inasmuch as it created a new sensation, appeared deeply interested in the cause of their departure. She entreated their return as soon as circumstances would permit; and declared no sort of amusement should go on during their absence, except it happened that her son and his people should arrive in the interim, which was very improbable. Her Ladyship, therefore, now endeavored to establish cpiiet reading parties, and c rational conversations;’ and invited Mrs. St. Leger to Longlands, who had hitherto been quite forgotten. She would have no small games played less intellectual than proverbs—6 qui veut vendre le Corbillon;' and f bout rhimès/ She cried dou n Blind-man s Buÿ\ and ‘ Petit Paquet,' as boisterous and tiresome; and placed Lady Mary Savili and her friend .Mr. Ovid Mussen, as perpetual dictators over the rational

pleasures of Longiands. The intellect of the whole society was now put mto requisition, and Raisoner fut remploi de toute la maison.

Lady Llanberis was delighted .with the new system of things, but could vnot help expressing her amazement, that two such clever persons as Colonel G’Donnel and the Duchess of Belmont were less expert at “small plays” of wit and sentiment than even Mr. Wharton, who was always a very Useless person in a house; or poor Sir Gilbert, who, though a man of good fashion, was proverbially dull. Lady Mary and her protegee, however, supplied ail deficiencies; and prodigal of their talent, made un grand depense de Vesprit.

Although the Christmas party at Longiands’was every day contracting its circle,, and its amusements became less varied, still O’Dormel found the place more tolerable, and suffered a no-

17 o

ther week to pass over Ins head without even observing its flight:	for

though the prevailing tone of society was neither more animated, nor more interesting, yet lie felt towards it more toleration and indulgence; or rather he sought beyond its pale an enjoyment above its power to bestow, or its intelligence to appreciate. A sort of conversational intercourse had established itself between the Duchess and himself, which, though free from familiarity, had still a general coincidence and mutual understanding, which approached to intimacy, and which rendered the mornings short, and the evenings delicious: for she frequently lingered to a late hour in the breakfast-room ; and at night O’Donnel had always some excuse in the unfinished subject of the day’s discussion, to approach and address her. Her acuteness, her animation, her power of generalizing, and rising beyond the nar-

row compass of detail—the flimsiness of personal observation, or the repetition of every-day anecdotes, which so frequently occupy the minds of the idle great, as of the vulgar little, with frivolous importance,* chained him near her. With her, discussion took a liberal scope, pursuing conjecture beyond the pale of stale opinion, neither guided by a theory, nor checked by a system ; while her vivid fancy threw a halo of brightness over the sobriety of reason, and mingled the charm of playfulness with the gravity of thought. Evidently owing much to nature, and nothing to education, without learning, as without its pretensions, she never wearied, because she was always original. Quick

* Savez vous (disoit la Soeur Marie) que la mere Cecile, et la mere Therese, viennent de se brouiller? Mais vous etes surpris?—quoi! tout de bon ; vous ignorez leur querelle—et d’on venez vous doue ?

The Soeur Marie is not confined to the plebeian circles-of life.

in perception, rapid in combination* she illuminated a subject as a sunbeam plays on a point, glittering and disappearing in the same instant, and seeming to reach by Intuition, what she had not the faculty to pursue by reflection. Careless, indolent, and variable, she threw out ideas as thev arose, which, though sometimes incorrect, might sometimes have afforded the elements of future systems for the train of sages to work upon; while her mind, as it appeared through lier intelligent but playful conversation, might be best imagined by the light and elegant definition of that

n	o

smiling philosophy, which has found its place in the French Encyclopedia, under the simple article of Gaiety.5’*

* Si j’avois a peindre d’un seul mol la Gaieté la raison et la volupté re-unics, je les appellcrois la Philosophie.

Didero(K~—Mot Gaieté.

O’Donnel had, in common with other men, a well-founded prejudice against what Moliere calls les Femmes Docteurs, who invent nothing and criticise every tiling, who declaim without conversing, display their'acquirements the better to conceal their innate poverty ; and who are always tiresome because they are never natural* But, between the Duchess of Belmont and Lady Mary Savill, the line of demarka-tion was too strongly drawn to suffer their characters to be confounded or mistaken ; still, however, the literary lady would have imposed on a thousand, where the woman of genius would scarcely be understood by one :	for,

in the particular circles of private life, it is alike with the highly gifted of both sexes : arrogant pretension will still take the lead of conscious ability, and the assuming dunce will win. the triumph of the hour, while careless genius laughs at the undiscerning um-

pire that bestows it ; or acute sensibility burns with indignation against the injustice which awards it. The public, the true and final judge, is sure to repeal the sentence of particular society, and merit receives immortality from its hands, while mere pretension is sent back to its original obscurity.

While the character and mind of the Duchess of Belmont thus grew on the estimation of CBDonnel, he began to discover, or to suppose, that there was more of design than vanity or frivolous ambition in her conduct; and, from many things she accidentally let fall from her lips, he was convinced she was acting up to that true doctrine which best applies to the world in general, and which blends the sarcasm of gaiety with the indulgence of contempt : but, while he daily felt increased admiration for her shining qualities, and the careless simplicity of manner which accompanied them, he

was still left ignorant whether any touch of feeling accompanied this superior mind, or if the heart was as cold as the imagination was warm: meantime he gave himself up to the spell of her society with unsuspecting confidence, and it had become his necessity while he merely considered it as his resource: still, however, he felt that she was a woman—and a fascinating woman ; and he was but too well versed in the exercise of the passions to be ignorant of their progressive and insidious influence. He was fully aware by what insensible shades of feeling repugnance may soften into toleration, indifference warm into preference, and preference rise to devoted, zealous, exclusive attachment. With respect to the Duchess., he had more than once brought • his feelings to the test of his former experience, but he believed that there were two insuperable bars between them,-which would ipevitably prove

the security of both—his own poverty and unprosperouscircumstances, which rendered honor more tenacious and pride more lofty; and her passionless and ambitious character, which indicated no tendency to disinterested attachment, or proneness to generous sacrifice. It was impossible he could act so as to commit his conduct, and subject his actions, to the imputation of sordid venality, or if he could, he had not from the Duchess’s general manner" towards himself any grounds for suspecting (save such as a coxcomb might advance) that he would succeed ; it was true, she conversed more with him than with any other man in their circle : but of what men were that circle comprized ? and since the desertion of Mr. F. Carlisle, who had never pardoned the wound she had given to his vanity, there was no one who seemed particularly anxious to obtain her exclusive attention, or to

dispute with him that place he was so anxious to secure.

The Duchess had more than once let fall observations which seemed intended to convey to him the conviction that she had no object in the preference she gave his society, besides the mere passing of the hoar : tc Surrounded as I am,” she said to him one day, 6t b}^ the flippant or the languid, by the over-strained or the under-toned, it is quite a relief to get some one of a humorous melancholy like-yourself, who is bv inheritance the victim of the graver sallies and more serious absurdi-ties of mankind, and who will kindly step with me behind the scenes of life, and assist me to laugh at the melo-drame enacted on its stage ; for, after all, I am afraid we must laugh or weep : we must consider it as the farce of ‘ Tom Thumb the Littlef or the tragedy of 6 Alexander the Great.”

“ You do me much honor by the

election/' said O’Donnel : “ and whatever may be the motive of the distinction. it is but too gracious and too flat-tering; yet, I must confess, that to look on life with the philosophical sang-froid with which your Grace seems to view it, one ought not one’s self to belong to the woeful pageants in the scene—they only 1 jest at scars that never felt a wound.51

“Nay/’ she replied, laughing : “my first appearance on any stage was by no means a splendid debut. I did not come out as Tiiburina, nor as her confidant, in the humbler guise of white dimity. I was a mere mute, a supernumerary in the troop of society. You saw me enact the subordinate part under the overwhelming influence of Lady Singleton, and you will allow it was neither very interesting: nor

O

very distinguished : however, I laughed at the whole business of the stage, as I do now—aside, I grant you, yet

still I laughed, and thought it all a monstrous farce/*

“ Since/’ said O’Donnel, eagerly, and glad to catch her at this point, “ your Grace has brought in review what you were with what you are, I must own that I have not yet been able to reconcile in my mind the Duchess of Belmont and Miss O’Hal-loran.”

“ O !J’ she replied carelessly: “ the story of Sixtus Quintus over again, wbo went double as a cardinal, but who, having once placed his foot on the first step of St. Peter’s chair, stood lofty, vigorous, and erect, and cried aloud to the shallow conclave who had placed him there, * Sono Papa

Further than this, O’Donnel had never found her inclined to go, on the subject of her transition of character : whatever she had been, what she now was, he felt but too fascinating, and he already contemplated his departure

from Longlands—from England—with an emotion of increasing regret,, as a period which would snap asunder one of the few golden threads accidentally woven in his dark and tangled web of lifc/>

As his third week at Longlands was now expired, he dispatched .Me, Rory to London to enquire for letters at the General Post-Office, in the hope of receiving his answer from General O’Donnel, At all events, however, he was resolved in a few days to quit his Alcina’s palace, and again to shroud himself in the obscurity of his lodgings in Marv-le-bone, so conformable to his fortunes and circumstances, should the expected letter not have arrived.

As the Duchess had foretold, the idea of the private theatricals had, by degrees, quite faded away: the primary motive of their institution was, indeed, removed by an unexpected

accident : and Lady Llanberis, who iiad got tired of hating Lady Loton, was not sorry to be called on for a feeling of a very opposite nature. Lady Loton had been driven from her husband’s house in shame and disgrace, the Chevalier St. Ange cited to appear in Doctor’s-Commons, by the injured nabob, and la tendre Zaire was in the last stage of a nervous fever, occasioned by the treachery of her friend and the desertion of her lover.

Lady Singleton, by a happy change in her circumstances, was now relieved from the humble task of catering for the amusements of others, and was once more about to set up for herself. Mr. Glentworth, who resembled his father only in the natural excellence of his disposition, but who was not, 44 du bois dont on fait les grands passions/" was already becoming the victim of that ennui which the necessary idleness'of great opulence

brings with it, when not counteracted by great intellect or great energy.

lie had, in common with his friend Lord INI rton, become weary of playing the Annchamis ” which he had only enacted because it was the fashion ; and, tired of every thing he had seen abroad, Im now resolved on being something considerable at home. After manv debates within himself, whether he would be a 41 rising young man,” a leader of the “ four-in-hand/’ or “ a giver of good dinnershe at last resolved on the latter ; wisely assuming, that though rising young men and driving barouches might go out of fashion, good dinners in London never could. He wrote therefore to Mr. Yandaleur to choose him a cook, and, as the “ true amphitrion” ought to be a bachelor by profession, he wrote also to invite his bustling step-mother to preside over the details of his menage, and to fit up his house in Portman-Square. Lady

Singleton, full of the importance of a woman who considers herself placed in the way of influencing a young unmarried man of twenty thousand a year, wrote to Lady Llanberis an epistle more concise and less sycophantic than usual ; excused her attendance at the plays ; lamented the disappointment of “ Zaire,*’ and promised to look out for some other French woman of fashion who was au fait to that style of part ; but the offer was rejected. Lady Llanberis declared she could not even bear to hear the plays mentioned, now that they only served to remind her of those unfortunate persons, Lady Loton and the Chevalier St. Ange; for in the deficiency of some new sensa- à tion to occupy her, she gave herself up to the most lively sympathy in the misfortunes of the former object of her rivalry and dislike.

One morning, O’Donnell with almost all the persons who now remained-

at Longlands, was looking over the papers, when Lady Llanberis entered the room, accompanied by a servant carrying-a basket heavily laden.

“There,” said she to him in an hurried and petulant manner; “there, take them to Colonel O'Donnel. 'There, Colonel, there are your skates.”

“ My skates !’’ repeated O’Donne!, in a tone of amazement.

“Yes/' she said, “you know von bespoke them ; though certainly I cannot see any particular use skates are of, when there has not been anv ice this week back. They may skate in Ire-

%/	%f

land without ice, as they fly, I bear, without wings ; but it won't do here, I promise you,” and she laughed satirically.

O’Donnel stood motionless with amazement at tüis unexpected attack, while the Duchess, wno was present, gravely said :—

“ i did not know, Lady Llanberis,

that vou took Colonel O’Don uel for •/

Joshua.’’

44 What do you mean ?” asked Lady Llanberis, haughtily.

44 I did not know you believed Colonel O’Donnel could make the sun standstill; and keep him a la dérobé for the benefit of the skating party at Longlands. ' Though, upon second thoughts, he may perhaps hold some undue influence over the winds; for the fly hi g wild Irish you speak of did keep upasort of visiting acquaintance with the Lapland witches ; and it is possible that with them he has taken out his patent of magic, and may be,, for ought we know, a sorcier a brevet.”

44 1 dare say lie is/’ said Lady Llan- -beris, with an ironical smile, “ for he seems to have bewitched your Grace.” With these words she turned away, and desiring the footman to carry off u those stupid skates,” she left the room.

T n /~\ y TA	i r U n c  _______C__l

l)le at this unexpected attack, the Duchess was covered with evident confusion at the inuendo of Lady Llanbe-ris’s speech. The blood mounted to hercheek, and again left it colourless ; but, perceiving the smiles of the men, and the whispers of the women, she recovered, with an instantaneous effort, all her wonted spirit and presence of mind, and, turning to O’Donnel, she said, with a natural laugh : —

Come, Mr, Merlin^ will 3*ou make the ‘charm firm and good,' by accompanying me to the music-room? I

want vou just to touch the bass of a */

sonata of Cramer’s on the violincello then turning round to the company, as O’Donnel opened the door for her, she said with a nod of the head and a smile:— “ Nowr, good folk, as Sir Peter Teazle says, 1 leave my character behind me.”

When they had entered the antiroom, she paused and observed :—

the world, you must expect to be driven by it for the rest of your life but now, having made my pas de charge upon the force I saw marshalled against me,I will make a skilful retreat, and leave you, Colonel O’Donnel, to follow Lady Llanberis, and make your peace with her, for I believe it is still in your power.'’

“ Make my peace !” returned O’Donnel, in a tone of increased amazement.

“ What then,” said the Duchess, as they both approached the fire-place, ct is it possible you have not perceived that for these few days back you have

Sail'd in the north of my Lady's opinion

“ No,” he said, with earnestness. cs I believe I have of late perceived nothing, but have dreamed away existence, and lived independent of perception.”

“ And is that a gracious mode of

being?” asked the Duchess, smiling, and leaning her arm on the mantle-piece.

6 4 In mv instance/* he returned smiling, 44 it is more gracious than either safe or lasting; for from such dreaming I shall be too soon obliged to awaken/*

Cf But why not try then to sleep and dream again like Caliban!'*

“ When such efforts are made, the reverse of our desires too frequently occurs ; and the former bright illusion is only followed up by some frightful catastrophe. I thought/’ he added, with another involuntary sigh, 44 that I at least had clone with dreaming! . . . but, enough of dreams and dreamers—can your Grace assign any cause for my present unpopularity with our noble hostess ?”

cc Assign cause !” repeated the Duchess, laughing: 46 why you speak as if you were Jilin g a bill> instead of

treating on the subtle and delicate subject of a fine lady $ caprice: however, not to go back to the trade winds we talked of some weeks ago, and which, notwithstanding my warnings, you seem to have expected, it is certain vou seem to have lost ground,

or rather---” she stopped short, and

then, with a countenance full of meaning, added: —Come, you know where you are, precisely, with Lady Llan-beris.’>

sf What can your Grace mean?” asked O’Donnel.

66 Psha, psha! you are at no loss for my meaning. The thing is, to

4 Catch, if you can, this Cynthia of the minute.’

Lord Charles is away ; you are here: you have relaxed something of your petits soins : Lady Lianberis is piqued. Now then is the critical moment, which the true Tactitian will aptly sieze on; and when some well-advised little cu-

pid in hisservice, might, with security,

■-----------Take	bis stand

On the rich widow’s jointur’d land.”

O’Donnel started. “ Your Grace’s meaning is now pretty obvious,” he returned, coldly. u And though you are rig-ht in supposing that poverty may authorise such suspicions; yet the fact is, I am so poor> Madam, I cannot afford to be a rascal.”

“ Nonsense ! what has rascal to do in the business ?” she returned with an incredulous smile.

“ More than the gentleman,” he replied, quickly ; ct for to seek a means of subsistence by the assumption of sentiments foreign to the feelings, and to pursue a woman for the mere purpose of obtaining a benefactress------”

“ Nay,” interrupted the Duchess, “ that is taking up the subject in a strange perverted sense. You would not object to Lady Llanberis merely because she is rich ?”

** I snouiu ceruuniy ue me less apt to seek to interest her because she is rich/’ he returned ; “ but, as under any circumstances she'would not be the object of my choice, I should the more abhor the idea of making her the victim of my sordidness ; for, though I am poor, and an Irishman, still I am not a fortune-hunter; nor have I, in this instance, the remotest reason to suppose Ï should succeed if Ï were.’’

Â pause of a moment ensued, and the Duchess then said :

“ That you are an irishman, genuine and thorough bred, there can be no doubt; with your porcupine spirit, rising before it is assailed, and throwing its quill before it receives a wound: with 3/011 one never knows whether one is cn the point of touching the life-pulse of pride, or the tremulous nerve of honor : however, if I have offended, I beg pardon; if I have been pert, I am sorry. So we will shake VOL. in.	F

hands., part friends,, and before Î again commit myself on such points, I will carefully read over Vincentio SavioZo on honor and honorable quarrels

As she spoke, she extended her hand to him with an air of friendliness not to be mistaken.

It was a beautiful hand ; and O’Don-nel’s eyes had a thousand times dwelt on it in ardent admiration ; yet now, withheld by some unaccountable feeling, he forbore to seize what he had so often covetted to touch, and to avail himself of her conciliating and condescending offer.

44	Oh, you won’t then ?” she returned playfully: 44 your voice is still for war, and, as Touchstone says, 4 seven justicescouid not make upthis quarrel.** 44 How can you exclaimed O’Donnel, in a tone of great emotion: ce you know not what you do:” he paused, and covered his face with his hands.

"very wen,' sne saici, attecting a pouting tone :	remember,	if we fall

out for ever, ’tis not / who am to blame. I offered you the hand, the very little hand, that saved your life at Carrick-a~ rede, and you refused it/*

O'Donnei raised his eyes to her face: she turned away, and moved towards the door : he sprung after her, and, seizing her hand, which she endeavoured earnestly to withdraw, the reiterated pressure of his lips crimsoned ' its snowy surface, and overwhelmed the Duchess with amazement and confusion. Before she could liberate it from his grasp, Lady Llanberis stood before them, but suddenly retreated, and closed the door violently after her.

“ Colonel O^Donnel \y> exclaimed the Duchess, in a tone of indescribable emotion, “you have cruelly committed me !”

tc Committed you!” he repeated, in great emotion; but she was gone*

4fUh, no! lie added; 44 it is /only who stand committed committed in every sense/*

He threw himself on a sofa, in great agitation of mind and feeling. He

O	O

could scarcely recall his confused thoughts to any one direct point of reflection : all was the tumult of contending passions, the conflict of opposed sentiments. He knew not what 'to suspect, what to hope, what to fear.

The fatal influence which the Duchess of Eel mont had acquired over all he had left of happiness, was now too strongly felt to admit of any further self-deception :	she	had taken posses-

sion of his mind, his senses : .and how little government he now held over ei-ther, he had recently but too well ascertained ; yet, hopeless and unaspiring as he really was, he believed that by the extravagance of his conduct; by looks that would not be commanded ; by lips that not 44 by words spoke only he had put her to the alternative of be-

lieving him to be either a coxcomb or a knave ; presuming on her condescension, or directing towards her those sordid views s.he had accused him of entertaining towards another.

Yet what could she mean by drawing himgradually on tocommithisown feelings, and the respect due to her character and situation. Cold and passionless as she herself was, she was still but too acute, but too sagacious, and too well versed in the springs of human passion by which others were actuated, not to know how readily they vibrate when skilfully touched. “ To what purpose then,’' he mentally asked., 41 has she eenbringing me to the test of her philosophical acumen? Is it to discover the full extent of my weakness, merely to add me to the results she has already drawn from her experiments upon human folly ; and thus, 4 winning me by honest trifles, to betray me to deep-- est consequences P or is it—Can it .

-	” ^	^	^	^	A’	^	4J I -* •

He arose in great emotion : he dared not follow the illusive light, by which hope was leading him beyond the bounds of probability; beyond the line which pride and honor had marked out to direct his conduct. He hurried away from a spot so fatal to the association in which he was involved ; and was crossing the hall on his way to his own apartment, when Lady Llanberis quickly passed him by, but as quickly turning back, she said :—

“ Oh, Colonel O'Donnel, I am afraid i was Madame de Trop a fevr minutes back in the anti-room. I intruded quite unintentionally, for I really wish you every possible success in the affair; and 1 think it will be a very good arrangement :—besides, the Duchess's jointure lies partly in Ireland, and-----”

“ I beg to assure your Ladyship, interrupted O’Donnel, earnestly/and in confusion, “ that you quite and

totally mistake; that your .finding me in the anti-room with the Duchess— in a word, Madam, I have no designs in any possible way upon the Duchess of Belmont’s jointure, lie where it may, nor, if I had, have I any reason on earth to suppose they would avail.0

44 01° returned Lady Llanberis, 44 that is your affair : I don’t at all want to force myself on your confidence ; but from your attentions to the Duchess, and you Irishmen being always so fortunate on these occasions ; and—* but my noticing it at all is extremely mauvais-ton, and the mere result of accident; and so, if you please,, we will drop the subject ;° and she passed on.

O’Donnel now with indignation discovered that he stood precisely in the same point of view to both ladies ; and he thought it was not impossible that he might even be considered as a mere Irish fortune-hunter by the whole society

of Longhands. His irritable nncl oversensitive feelings took the alarm :	he

bitterly lamented the weakness which had led him on, from day to day, to prolong his visit, after the éclaircissement which had taken place between him and Lady Llanberis; and., under the impulse of new and overwhelming feelings., the most consonant to his character, temper, and prejudices, he resolved on quitting Longlands the following day, and on banishing from his recollection the heartless circle he should leave behind hint ; but above all, he determined to forget her who alone had been the spell of his detention, the cause of all he now felt, and now suffered.

On reaching his own apartment, his resolution received a fresh spur from two letters put into his hands by Me. Ilory : the one was from General O’Donnel: it was friendly and favora-able as his most sanguine desires

could lead him to expect. To many professions of kindness, was added an offer of a majority in his own regiment of hussars. O’Donnei sighed deeply as he folded up this letter. Though gratified by its general tone of friendship,, his acceptance of the offer it contained was more than ever the result of his dire necessity, and equally foreign from his feelings and his choice.

The-other letter, as Me. Rory in great emotion informed him", had the post-mark of Bcdlima-gra-bartagh on the cover ; and on opening it, he found it came from the priest of his own parish, and ran as follows.

Sir,

I take the liberty of addressing you, at the dying request of the late Mrs. Honor Kelly, your grandaunt, to whom I yesterday administered the last offices of the church, and who expired this morning, of thechro-

nie disease by which she has been sa long afflicted.

She bequeathed you all she had to leave—her blessing and grateful thanks

o	o

for your goodness to her; and requested that you would depute some person to take possession of the premises you assigned toher duringherlife, asshe had reason to fear, from a threatening letter received after your departure, that an ill-disposed person, nephew to her late husband, will lay claim to the place, as heir-at-law to any thing she might be possessed of. As this may occasion some trouble, though such a claim could not be established in the end, I take the liberty of advising you, Sir, to appoint some person to take possession forthwith ; and, further, if you mean to dispose of the place, to put it up to auction : many gentlemen in the country might be glad to obtain it, either as a sporting or fishing lodge; .for the neighbouring mountains, lakes,

and sea-coast, make it a very desirable spot for that purpose.

I would offer my own services on this occasion with great pleasure; but that, having been for some time back uncomfortably situated with Mr. Costello, who carries every thing before him in this little neighbourhood, and who protects Mr. Kelly, and has him at this moment writing in his office, I would not wish to interfere.

I remain, Sir, with great respect, Your obedient servant,

Arthur Murphy.

January 19th.

P. S. The remains of the late Mrs. H. Kelly are to be interred in the Abbey grounds in the mountains to-morrow morning. She left a gold cross, which was ail she died possessed of, to defray the expences of her funeral, about which she was very anxious to the last. . The old woman will remain

in the house till vour orders arrive: I have offered to take her to mine, but she lias a nephew in the neighbourhood willing to receive her.

O’Donnel communicated the contents of this letter to Me. Rory, who stood anxiously watching his countenance, and asked him if he would have any objection to go off immediately to Ireland, to take possession and dispose of the little property which had thus, so unexpectedly,, fallen again into his hands.

fS No objection in life, your Honor, but will go with all the veins/’returned Me. Rory, his countenance brightening up at the prospect of again seeing Ireland, and the certainty that his master's very slender finances would be considerably the better by an event, which he nevertheless pathetically de* plored.

“ And so Mistress Kelly's dead, your.

Honor: well, see that!—why then, troth, I am heartily sorry for her, the cratur ! for she was just such another kind-hearted ould gentlewoman as her brother, God rest him !—who was a real O'Donnel, and never had the hand closed, nor the heart cold, till the day of his death. Til be bound, your Honor, she’ll have an elegant herring, for the sake of the family. Well, that Torney Costelloes the devil; God pardon me !—And so oul,d Mary is going to live with her nephew, Brian Dog-herty. O ! I know him well, Sir, and not a dacenter lad between this and himself: he lives near the four roads, near to Aughinunchen mountain. Well, troth, he cannot but have a blessing for that same, in regard of giving his ould aunt her bit and her sup for the rest of her days, God help her.’’

“ And we too, Me. Rory, poor as we are,’’ said O'Donnel,u we must assist,

Phelim, in doing something for poor Mary, out of whatever you may receive for the sale of the place.’ '

“ O î Pll engage you will, your Honor ; long life to you! You never was backward yet, in respect of goodness, never was ; and it’s pity but what you had all Donegal to your own ; troth, it is, which you would surely, if every one had their right, Colonel.’'

“ That is nonsense, Me. Rory,” said O’Donnel. “ i have every thing I have a right to : but we must lose no time. I shall have my letters ready in an hour, and you can go on the top of the stage that passes the Park gate at five o’clock.”

ct O ! I can, Sir, surely.”

“ And i wish you to proceed by the night coach to Liverpool directly, and take your passage for Londonderry, which will shorten your journey by three or four hundred miles, going and

returning ; and I beg that you will make the best speed back, as time is precious. ’’

“ O ! I will, Sir, surely ; what would ail me but be back soon, any how, plase God/’

O’Donnel now seated himself at the writing table, and had made some progress in his letters, supposing Me. Rory to be gone to make the necessary arrangements for his departure ; when a noise at the door of his room induced him to turn round, and he perceived Me. Rory still standing near it, and playing with the handle of the lock,

“ Have you any thing to say to me. Me. Rory?” asked O’Donnel, resuming his writing.

“ Is it me. Sir ? O ! no. Colonel, I have not ; nothing in life,” returned Me. Rory, advancing to the table, and taking up a shoe-buckle, which he began to rub with the sleeve of his coat

with great violence, “ nothing in life,

....only-------

After a pause, O’Donncl, raising his head from the paper, asked rather impatiently:

tc Only what, Me. Rory ?” cf Only in regard of the little still-room maid.’’

“ Of who?” asked O’Donnel, turning round.

cc Of who, your Honor, is it ? why of a tight little bit of a girl, your Honor, who does be in the still-room, and warms the hot water for your dressing-room, Colonel ; and made the barley drink for your Honor, when you had the could, Sir/’

66 AVell remembered/’ said O’Don-nel. I think you mayas well make a remuneration to any of the servants who have been in attendance on my apartments, Me. Rory : there is my purse, and here is a note for yourself,

for your expences on your journey ; and 1 think you may as welt take alt my things to Town, except what I shall want to dress to-day ; for/’ he added, with a deep sigh, “ I shall leave Longlands to-morrow for London myself ; and remember my strict orders not to mention my address in Town to any human being here/'

“ O ! I'll be bound I won’t, your

*' lr

Honor, nor never did.”

O’Donnel now returned to writing, but hearing Me. Rory' hem several times, he said :—

46 Why don’t you go, Me. Rory? pray leave the room.”

“ I will, Sir ; I am just going ; only I thought I’d be after making bould to

mintion to your Honor----

O’Donnel now throwing down his pen, arose and said :—

What is the matter, Me. Rory ?”

4"Nothing is the matter to signify,

Sir; only if you had’nt sent me back to,

\

Ireland to-night. Colonel, I thought, with your leave, I’d just have been married to-morrow, Sir/*

Cl Married !” returned O’Donnel, in utter astonishment :	you	married	!”

Q, yes, Sir, if your Honor was no wise contrary, for I got the girl’s con-sint a week ago,and my own, Sir ; that’s the girl in the still-room,, Sir, for sure I never got a taste in the room with that foreign tawny young master after the first day ; but was put down to get my bit in the still-room, with the young man there and the two maids ; and more comfortabler I would'nt wish to be than there, any way; and I used to help Martha, the little cratur, to wash up the cheney, and make the white wine whey; and while we were over the whey I used to discourse her, and so, your Honor, I don’t know how it was, but it seemed • the most natral thing in life; and I—and so she—and then we thought we’d—and so we are to be

married to-morrow, Colonel, barring I go to Ireland to-night. Sir.”

44 How is it possible,” said O’Don-nel, equally vexed and astonished by this intelligence, 44 that, being, as you are, an honest and a worthy man, you have entered on so serious an engagement, circumstanced as you now are ?” 4‘ Sairious, your Honor ! O ! I think nothing of it, Sir, at all, in regard of being married once t before ; when we were in barreuk, Colonel, before we went to the Western Indies, and a nice little girl she was ; only the day after the wedding, her first husband came to claim her, and listed in the regiment; and when he was killed at St, Domingo, she wanted to prove her right to me, Sir, and followed me to Donegal, but I would have no call to her then, in respect to a turn I took to leading a bachelor’s life.”

44 Then I am sure, Me. Rory, you had much better abide by that résolu-

tion, than involve this unfortunate young* woman in your own precarious situation ; for when we go abroad, which we shall do immediately, what would become of your wife ?”

fc'

“ O ! God would take care of her, Sir, till I came back, or had the way to send for her over; besides, sure, I’d sind her my pav, every sixpence of it ; that’s when I am a corplar, Sir.”

“ In a word, Me. Rory/* said O’Don-liel, “ for your own sake, and for the sake of the inconsiderate person who has accepted of you, either you must for the present give up her, or give up me. If you marry her, you are bound not to desert her, and you must remain to assist and support her. If, on the contrary, you chuse to go abroad with me—but observe, however, 1 insist on nothing ; I only present you an alternative : go then, consult with this ' young woman ; make known honestly to her your situation, your inability at

present to provide for her, or to take her with yon ; and when you have consulted together, return, and let me know vour intentions.5’

Me. Rory., with an agitation of countenance that betrayed no feeble conflict of mind, dropped his head on his breast, uttered an ochone! and slowly left the room.

' This extraordinary involvement of the susceptible and inconsiderate Me.

Rorv awakened a train of thought in

o

Q’Donnel’s mind but iittle propitious to his epistolary engagements. Me.

Rory’s conduct in this instance was perfectly Irish, as it touched his own rank in life ; and O’Donnei felt that it was also perfectly human. He almost regretted, while he condemned those feelings, which, unregulated and unrestrained, sought by the most direct means the possession of their object,

And without reference to consequences,

/

embraced the present good as indemnity for the uncertain future—the disappointed past.

Under what an opposite influence did he act, and how different were the results of his conduct : living in con-tinual struggle with himself: pride at variance with fortune, honor with interest, and a morbid sensibility, the result of a lofty spirit, and an adverse destiny, discoloring even the few bright tints that still lingered upon the gloomy horizon of existence—else, why was he so prompt to construe negligence into slight, and slight into insult? Why did he shrink from the advances of friendship, lest they should cover the bondage of dependence ? or why, when the woman who had now obtained possession of his whole being, met those eyes that had no longer power to conceal the secret of his heart ? Did he suddenly withdraw

them with the consciousness of guilt, merely because she was prosperous and rich, and he

<c Sick ia the world’s regards, wretched and low ?”

Yet, while he thus dreaded the world’s cold distrust, were his feelings less pure, his motives less disinterested, than if fortune had placed him beyond the aim of suspicion ? He continued to muse himself into new misery ; and thoughts came crowding with a painful velocity on his mind; for reflection is always an enemy to the unhappy : till at last he endeavoured to rouse himself from his “ moody melancholy,0 and to chace away its influence by again resuming his writing.

He had just finished his last letter when Me. Rory entered the room. He stood silently behind his master’s chair while he sealed-his letters, and O’Donnel then turning round, perceived that his eyes were red; and pity-

ing the imprudence he had almost been led to envv, his heart softened towards -him.

“ Well, my poor Me. Rory/’ he said.

“ Well, your Honor,” returned Me. Rory, in a low tone, u I’m ready to go, Sir, now/’

O’Donnel .was affected by the break in his voice. “ You have acted then like an honest man,” he returned, cc and sacrificed your feelings to a sense of right.”

tc O, Î have, Sir!” said Me. Rory, with a deep sigh.

cc Well,” said O’Donnel.

££ Well, Sir, the girl is no ways im-raisoncible, but quite the contrary, and I tould her all your Honor was saying ; and she said it was mighty right, but she cried a power, for all that, Sir, the cratur, as well she might; and so I pledged my troth to her never to marry, good or bad, till I saw her face again ;

\

arm i gave uer uie goiu pieces i uau ; and broke a straw with her* which is as good as if 1 put the ring on her finger, and am sooth sworn to write to her, and manes to bring her a gift from Ireland, if it is only a pair of Conomava stockings, and troth, and I wish they

O J	'	%/

were Limerick gloves, for her sake.” O’Donncl now expressed himself in the warmest terms of commendation of Me. Rory's conduct, and with gratitude for the new proof of devotion he

* Il faut rompre la paille. Une paille rompue llend, entre les gens d’honneur, une affaire conclue.

Molicre.—Le dépit amoureux.

This is a custom of great autl universal antiquity in Europe, and is still preserved in Ireland : it is retained in England, under the rustic ceremony of the cracked sixpence. Anciently, it formed a part of compacts, the greatest and. the gravest among princes ; and hence the Latin verb stipulor, from stipula, and perhaps, also, feed us from the Irish fodar, straw.

VOL. III.	G

had given to himself ; and Me. Ilory, whose affection for his master was the dominant passion of his nature, gradual]}' cheered up as he listened to his own praises, from one so loved and reverenced ; and he replied :	I am en-

tirely obliged to your Honor for your good opinion, and 1 hope Ï’ll merit that same to the day of my death; and sure, Sir, if it’s the will of God, we may come together yet, as Ï tould her; and return together to my own on Id country, long life to it; and when your Honor marries some fine rich foreign lady, in foreign parts, and brings her over to Ireland, and lives there in great state, Martha and me will live with ye’z, in the capacity of a house-maid, and I’ll engage there’s luck, and great luck, in store for us all yet.Colonel.” O’Donnel smiled at this prosperous conclusion, which Me. Rory’s warm imagination conjured up; and having given him all necessary instructions as

io iLie commission assigned co mm, and some letters for the London post, he dismissed him, and went to dress for dinner, though but ill disposed to join society of any description ; and equally averse in his present state of feelings to meet either the ej^es of Lady Llan-beris, or the Duchess of Belmont.

g 9

CHAPTER 22

/

The dinner-bell had rung some time before O’Donnel left the room; and when he took his seat at table, he perceived a new guest, whom he had not before seen at Longlands. In spite of a fine figure, and a countenance full of animation, he was evidently approaching his climacteric. His blue ribbon did not more bespeak him a person of distinction than his air, his address, and that indescribable ease and charm of manner which nature and the world sometimes combine in those who have had the good fortune to be eminently favored by both. He sat between Lady Llanberis and the Du-qhess : and Q’Donne] could not help

perceiving, that though he listened and answered to Lady Llanberis, yet he was most pleased when he gave his attention to the Duchess. He thought there seemed to he a certain intelligence between them. They talked of persons known to each, of evenings passed at Belmont House in the late Duke’s time, of observations formerly made, and of jests and badinage applicable to some particular circle in which they had lived together. O’Donnel felt more than curiosity, more than impatience, more than he had ever felt in his life before.

The Duchess he thought seemed almost studiously to avoid his eyes, although she sat directly opposite to him : and all the intelligence he could gain respecting this interesting stranger was that he was a Lord S. and but lately arrived from the continent.

When the ladies retired from table, and the few gentlemen remaining at

Longlands drew their little circle round the fire, an observation from Lord S. on climate drew a rejoinder and an agreement in opinion from O’Donnel* Subject grew out of subject ; and the sympathy which always exists, and generally manifests itself between intelligent minds and refined tastes, soon drew them into a sort of tête-à-tête conversation, which only terminated when they arose to join the ladies. Lord S. on entering the drawing-room immediately took his seat on an otto* man next the Duchess: and O’Don-nel, with a feeling of misery, which he had not the courage to analyze, and was unable to control, left the drawing-room, and threw himself into a fauteuil in the half-lighted and empty anti-chamber. It was the last night he intended to pass at Longlands ; and although very little ceremony was observed about departures, the visitants being used like the ghosts in Macbeth»

to ft come like shadows, so depart,’5 vet he felt it something like a dutv to

»'	O	^

mention his intention to Lady Llanbe-ris, and even to make his acknowledgments for the hospitable attentions he had received at her hands : but he had no power, no spirits, to bend his thoughts to ceremonies. He resolved, therefore, on putting off the intention till the moment of his departure ; and had resigned himself to a train of feelings, into which every emotion connected with painful and uncomfortable reflections had a share. In this gloomy state of meditation Miss Carlisle perceived him as she was passing through the anti-room ; and with her usual naïveté, she approached and rallied him freely on his solitary disposition, and Orlando-like appearance : but finding him but ill disposed to take her on her own tone, she changed it, and began to talk of Lord S. in terms of such admiration, that O’Donnel, though he

scarcely understood why, secretly accused her of malice. From general encomium, however, she digressed into particular history ; and O’Donnel, in answer to some questions which he conceived he iiad artfully, though negligently made, learnt that Lord S. was one of the last survivors of the Duke of Belmont’s particular set ; that he had lived a good deal at Belmont House during the first month of his marriage

O	O

with the present Duchess, of whose talents and conversation he was a great admirer; that he had passed the last year and a half abroad ; and that she believed it would excite no great surprize if he was to offer his hand to the widow of his old friend : “ And,” she concluded, “he is such supvemefashion and bon-ton, that I cannot conceive any woman’s refusing him : can you, Colonel ?”

“ Who, I ?” said O’Donnei, starting from the suddenness of the application :

“ I really am not at all qualified to judge-”

st The old Marquis of B. his father, is still alive/’ she continued, “ and would not readily consent to the match ; but otherwise there could be no obstacle, for the Duchess has proved that where rank and fashion are to be had she is not over-nice as to age or character. Lord S. like the late Duke, has been rather a roue”

Here the conversation was broken up by the entrance of the youngest Miss Carlisle, who was sent by Lady Llanberis to collect every one to play7— whai\s my thought like/ and when O’Donnel begged to decline the summons, the two sisters declared that if he did not return 'with them, they would inform Lady Llanberis ot his desertion. O’Donnel, as much to get rid of their importunities as to avoid the appearance of singularity, accom-: panied them back to the drawing-room.

a

1 lie circle was already formed, and what's my thought like/ was asking round wich great rapidity by Lady Llanberis. It was likened to the sun, moon, stars, the elements ; to any thing and every thing. Lord S. who was the first asked, had said A watch : when it again came round to him, Lady Llanberis asked, 44 W hy then is the Duchess like a watch /”

44 This is a very odd coincidence,” said Lord S —, instead of replying directly to the question. 44 Three years ago, playing this game in a family circle at Lady Singleton’s, I hit upon the same object, and found it applied to the same subject: I remember answering, by applying the device,

4* Chcto fuor, commoto dentro;”

and 1 have since given myself credit for my penetration, winch discovered through a demure shyness, and silent reserve,44 that within which passed shew”

86 Chetofuor!” repeated Lady Llan-beris : 44 why I have seen a seal somewhere with that motto.”

44 The Duchess had one,” said Lord S— : 44 if I remember right, your Grace adopted the device of a dial plate with that motto.”

44 No,, no,” said Lady Llanberis, 44 it was not the Duchess. O ! I remember,, it was with you. Colonel O’Donnel ; it was on some letter you were shewing me.”

A sensation, like an electric shock? passed through the frame of O’Donnel: he scarcely heard, and did not answer Lady Llanberis’s question. His eyes were fixed on the countenance of the Duchess, which exhibited every symptom of confusion and profound emotion. Lady Llanberis looked at them both alternately, with amazement, and evcrv one present seemed struck with

i/	I

the incident. Colonel O’Donnel had

a letter in his possession with the Duchess’s seal—he had shewn it to Lady Llanbcris. The Duchess was confounded,O’Donnel was abashed. Lady Llanberis seemed interested without being displeased :	each	drew	their

particular inference. O’Donnel was suspected of having played the part of a lover to both ladies. How much further surmise would have gone it might be difficult to say, had not Lord S— rallied the attention of the party to their game, by giving in a ring as a forfeit, and declaring, that however the similitude held good between the watch and Miss O' Bailor an, it was lost between the watch and the Duchess of Belmont: he then reminded Lady Llanberis that the game stood with Lady Mary, and thus again set it afloat.

As soon as decency would permit, and before prudence warranted it,

O’Donnel left the circle, and retired to the desirable solitude of his own apart-ment.

He had now, by means the most purely accidental and unforeseen, come at the mystery which had so long distanced conjecture, and had discovered his liberal benefactress in the last person on whom his suspicions could have fallen. In the first instance it would have been utterly impossible to have directed those suspicions to a poor and destitute girl, who was herself labouring for subsistence ; and for the rest, there was nothing on the part of the Duchess of Belmont, since he had known her as such, to lead him for a moment to suppose that such an act of extravagant and unwarrantable liberality belonged to her character. She had also talked over the matter with such easy indifference, and treated the whole with such pointed irony, that

she had never for a moment occurred to him as one whose feelings of sympathy would rise beyond the level of prudence and moderation.

He was then the object of her pity and relief—of her compassion and her bounty. His meeting with her at Lonidands was accidental on her part, as unexpected on his; and having generously lavished on him the means of existence, as she would perhaps upon any other unfortunate, similarly situated, she was careless where that existence, to whose maintenance she had contributed, might be obscurely dragged on ; nor even now, that they had met under circumstances favorable to their knowledge of each other, was it a matter of greater importance to her—was it not supposed that she might be at no distant day married to a man who had know'll and admired her for three years, and discovered, even under the impe-

«netrable reserve of Miss O’Halloran, the talents and charms of the Duchess of Belmont.

“ But of what moment is it to me,’’ continued O’Donnel, as he paced the limits of his room with hurried steps, “ who admires her—to whom she may be married ? For me there is now nothing left to do but to acknowledge the discovery I have made, offer her my acknowledgments, and return her her money.0

For this purpose he sat down at his writing-table; and discontented with every form of expression into which he endeavoured to throw his conflicting thoughts, he at last produced a few incoherent lines, dictated between the shame of mortified pride and the ardor of heart-felt gratitude; while passion, struggling with prudence and jealousy, betrayed its energy even where it restrained its tenderness: and at variance with himself, with her, with the whole

world, he more than ever lamented the infatuation that had led him to throw the little wreck of his happiness into the keeping of one, whom, though so lately the source of all human «ood to

-	o

him, he now devoutly wished he had

never known, since she had only served

to fill up the measure of his sufferings,

and to add the pang of disappointed

passion to the misery of indigence.

Good and evil have existence only in

%/

relation to the beings to whom they are referred ; and man, measuring #all things by the standard of his own feelings, applies those epithets to circumstances, as they do, or do not, co-ordinate with his own powers of enjoyment: while these are flattered, “ whatever is, is rightdisplace him, and he accuses the universe of disorder.

After a night of sleepless misery, he descended, on the following morning, to the breakfast-room, in the intention of putting his letter into the Duchess’s

own hands, without coining to any further explanation, and of informing Lady Llanberis of his intended departure. No opportunity, however, was allowed him of doing either. The Duchess breakfasted in her own room, and Lady Llanberis was so full of news, letters, and engagements, that there was no chance of addressing her. She read a . letter from her son, dated from Portsmouth, who had just landed, and was to arrive at Long lands the following

O	O

day, with his friend Mr. Glentworth. She mentioned another letter which she had received from Lord Charles Savill, announcing the death of his uncle, and the obligation he was under of visiting the estates, left him by this demise, in Scotland, before he returned : and also a third letter from Lady Singleton, proposing herself and Mr. and Mrs. Van-daleur, and Mr. Dexter, to come clown in a few days to Lonslands. to meet Mr. Glentworth. A new dramatis per-

souœ, therefore, was about to appear upon the scene, and Lady Llanberis was as happy as a new set of sensations could make her. Having detailed her news with great at imation and delight, she was hurrying out of the room to visit General and Lady M. Savill, who did not appear, in consequence of the intelligence which the post had brought in of their uncle’s death, when she caught O’Donnel’s eye.

“ Colonel (^Donnel,5’ she said, coldly, “ if you mean to return to Ireland shortly, Lady Singleton has sent you a commission to procure her some of those little horses which are sold by the dozen in your province: I don’t exactly know what she means, but you do, 1 suppose. However, here is lier letter; von will find it somewhere or other: there is nothing particular in it: aye, here it is,” and running over the letters she held in her hand; — 44 there is her coronet: she has no

pretty devices. Poor Lady Singleton! the ditto fuor would never do for her.” And with rather a sarcastic smile, she gave him the letter, and left him not more comfortable, nor at ease, from her manner and inuendo, than when he had entered the room. He, however, followed her into the hall, in the hope of obtaining an audience of leave; but almost in the same moment Lord S. met and turned back with her.

O'Donnel entered the saloon, the door of which stood open, and remained a considerable time leaning against a window frame, lost in thought, and almost unconscious that he still held Lady Singleton’s letter in his hand. The pointed coldness of Lady Llanberis’s manner mortified him, and urged his immediate departure. It was evident that he hadsurvived his popuiaritj^and even, humiliating as was the idea, out-stayed his welcome: resolving, therefore, not to remain another hour under a

roof where he might be deemed an intruder, nor to make any further effort to obtain an interview with his capricious hostess, he opened Lady Singleton’s letter, to read and return it, with a note to the Countess, in which he meant to take leave.

In the supposition that the commission alluded to might be written in the envelope, he glanced his eye overit before he took the trouble of looking through the enclosure; but it was a blank, except that at the top of the page was written,

“ My dear Countess’s devoted friend, C. Singleton.

London, January 20th.

Baker Street.”

O’Donnel turned to the half sheet of note-paper inclosed, which seemed by the abruptness of its beginning to be only a part of her letter, commencing with his own name: he read as follows :—

“ Jbor U Donnel—your 4 copper Colonel,’Chevalier, Comte, or mi Lord, O’Donnel ; for all these he has been in his day, 1 dare say, and more.”

O’Donnel started—paused—doubted the evidence of his senses-took up the note-paper again—again read these words —hurried back his eyes to the signature in the envelope—to the seal, the address—it was Lady Singleton’s signature and seal ; the address was to Lady Llanberis ; the post-mark London; the date the preceding day. He again, therefore, recommenced the perusal of this extraordinary letter, which he naturally supposed Lady Llanberis had put into his hand for some particular purpose, which might develope itself as he read on, and without pausing he went through the whole.

M For O’Donnel—your c copper Colonel,’ Chevalier, Comte, or mi Lord, O’Donnel; for all these, no doubt, he

has been in his dav, and more too. I must confess Ï was a little surprized to hear, by your letter, that he was still at Longlands, nor have I the remotest idea what it means. You?engouement for this soi disant Irish Chief I thought was pretty well over, after the first ten days of his residence with you, as you seemed to have discovered that he was neither particularly useful or ornamental, and appeared rather to vote the illustre malheureux a bore; and now, that having given up the French plays, you can possibly have no further use for this sublime Orosmane, I see no reason on earth why you should give him any more encouragement to remain under your roof. Of all the pets that a woman of fashion ever hit on, to run tame about her house, a Pet Irishman is the most extraordinary as well as the most disreputable.

“ Your asking me so seriously my opinion of him at this time of day is

rather too good, and made me laugh heartily ; but really, my dear Lady, one cannot go on for ever repeating, Irish fortune hunter, adventurer, &c.&c. That he is, even from his own account of himself (as you have heard it), an equivocal character, is pretty obvious; and in my opinion, at least, there is nothing in his person or manners to discredit the inference. I have before met with a few of these Counts of the Holy Roman Empire, who were, for the most part, accommodating, pliable gentry enough : but this presuming and self-opinionated coxcomb would fain play the Hero d’Opera, of which, by the bye, he has exactly the air, and seems onlv to doubt whether he will throw the handkerchief at Lady Llan?-beris, or a Pamela Duchess of Belmont, who is completely in his own way. As, however, I think «//equivocal characters are dangerous, in as much as they have nothing to lose on the side of re-

potation, and therefore may fairly go what lengths they please, I advise YOU to let this Irish, French, German,

Colonel, down softly: he will soon find

* %/

out what you mean, and make his bow before he is too far shewn up to make his way elsewhere, for you may be sure he will present himself in town as fresh from Lon g lands, with the sanction of your Ladyship’s notice, and the certificate of his gentillesse obtained from your favor: and now, as in the midst of all my unpleasant bustle here 1 have contrived to fill three sheets of Mr. Mussen s pretty deviced note-paper, and even to write this last half sheet cross-icays twice over, I hope you will give me due credit for my devotion, and excuse me, if for want of room, as well as want of time, I forbear to add more than what will cover this little French motto—namely, that I am, as ever, jmur slave, &c. &c.

C. Savxll.

O’Donnel had, with great difficulty, got through this letter. The cross- * writing was not easily deciphered, and the mingled emotion of surprize and indignation at Lady Singleton’s sup-*posed duplicity, and cruel attack upon the character of a man whom she had herself introduced into the house whence she endeavoured to chase him with obloquy, left him scarcely patience or power to come to the end : still, however, hoping to find some authority, reason, or excuse, for this sudden change in her Ladyship’s sentiments, he read on, till the signature of Lord Charles Savill explained at once the whole mystery, and convinced him that Lady Llanberis, with her usual giddiness, had, by mistake, , put part of Lord Charles’s letter into Lady Singleton’s envelope instead of her own. The first flush of strong and

-	o

indignant feeling soon subsided. This event rather steadied his nerves than

VOL. III.	H

shook them ; and by giving a direct object to his floating emotions., of misery and indignation, it served rather to tranquillize than to disturb him. After nearly an hour spent in walking up and down the room in deép reverie, he went to his own apartment, and wrote the following billet to Lady Llanberis :

“ Colonel O’Donne! presents his compliments to the Countess of Llanberis—as business of urgent nature requires his immediate presence in London, and as her Ladyship's engagements may not afford him the oppor- ' tunity of paying, in person, his farewell respects previous to his departure this- day from Longlands, he seizes on the only mode left him to make his most grateful acknowledgments, and to offer' his best wishes for the continuance of her Ladyship’s health eind happiness.’1

U Donne! then took his letter tor the Duchess, and after much irresolution, resolved on presenting it himself at the door of her dressing-room : thither he proceeded. Her maid answered to bis knock, and as he put the letter into her hand, he perceived the Duchess standing at the fire-place in earnest conversation with Lord S. He drew back—the door closed. He would have given all the world to have re* called his letter, and to be able to return its inclosures in a blank cover: it was now too late. He had previously given orders about having his things sent after him by the stage to the coach-office, and sending Lady Llan-beris his note of adieu, by a footman he met in the hall, he hurried from the splendid mansion of Longlands in a state of feeling still more wretched than he had entered it. He had then only misfortune to endure—he had new passions to combat. As he passed K 2

through the porte-cocher, lie perceived Lord S/s carriage, and out-riders approaching it: he was then returning to London also: but, Oh!5’ thought O’Donnel ;	“	under	what	different

circumstances!” Fearful of being seen by Lord S. he avoided the high 'road, and proceeded on foot across a dreary heath, chilled by the sleeting showers of an inclement day, and

Wrapt in dismal thinkings;”

for independent of the last-born suffering, which lay brooding at his heart, he was wearv and sick of a state of for-tune which subjected him to shameful suspicions, and exposed him to the shafts of obloquy and contempt, the more insupportable because he had

No signs, save men’s opinions and

His living-blood, to shew the world he was

A gentleman..........



CHAPTER 23

O’Donnel arrived in town late in the evening. It had snowed heavily, almost from the time he had left Long-lands; yet though he was chilled by the intense cold, and his clothes were wet through, he proceeded at once to Belmont House, to inquire Lord Charles's address, of whom Lady Llan-beris had spoken that day as being still in Northumberland. The porter could give him no certain intelligence, but directed him to Lord Charles SavilTs own house. Thither he directed his steps, and learned from the house-steward, that his Lordship, in a letter of that day, had ordered all letters to be directed to ....   Northumber-

land, until the 8th of February, when

— w	v	V	A’	n

iiis letters were to be forwarded to his agents at Edinburgh; in the neighbourhood of which he intended to remain for some time.

O’Donnel now proceeded to his own comfortless and obscure home, in Marv-le-bone, where no fond or cor. dial .reception awaited his arrival, save what his faithful dog bestowed on him. Yet so anxiously does the heart of man call for some reciprocation to its feelings, that even the caresses of Bran were not ungracious to the heart of his master.

He learnt from the person of the house, that Me. Rory had set off foe Ireland the night before ; and he received from him a small [iron box3 containing some family documents, which he had entrusted to his care on his departure for Longhands. They were only deeds of estates long passed out of his family, the letters-patent of nobility long since forfeited, and some original ■

letters from crowned heads to his ancestors, which were as intrinsically valuable to the mere antiquarian, as to the descendant of the persons to whom they were addressed. Yet with a fondness, a pride, which perhaps bordered on weakness, O’Donnel prized and preserved these relics of former greatness, and intended to carry them with him to the continent, already the depository of so many of the family archives of Ireland.

Notwithstanding a feeling of fatigue and exhaustion, and that it was much too late for the post, O’Donnel addressed the following letter to Lord Charles Savili, before he retired to rest, enclosing with it the letter and envelop he had received from Lady Llanberis.

My Lord,

The enclosed was put into my hands for my perusal by the Countess Llanberis, as a letter from Lady Singleton.

h 4

Involved in her Ladyship’s mistake, I read it under a similar impression; but I did not read it through without twice referring to the signature in the envelop. The appearance of your Lordship’s name at the end of the enclosed page dissipated my error, and left me nothing to regret in the discovery, but that I had obtained a knowledge of your Lordship’s opinion of my views and character, by means,which, though unsought and unavoidable, were the last I should voluntarily have chosen. 'For the rest, my Lord, all comment would be equally idle and vain. You must either immediately state through me to the Countess of Llanberis, the fads upon which the opinions of the enclosed letter are founded, or unsay all you have said; or you must afford me the only redress in your power to make, or in mine to receive. As my stay in England is extremely limited, your Lordship’s answer in due course

llJubl LiL LLI HJ i lit, YVIiclIicl 1 dill lO dWdlt

your arrival in town, or to follow you into Scotland.

I am, my Lord,

&c. &c. &c.

O’Donnel.

London,

—■— Coffee-house,   Street,

Mary.le-bone.

O’Donnel arose the next morning at day-light. The perturbation of his spirits would not suffer him to rest, or even to remain in bed : and though a feverish heat burnt in his veins, and the cold and wet to which he had exposed himself the preceding night already exhibited its effect in symptoms by no means equivocal, yet as soon as he was dressed, he went himself to the post-office with his letter: he did act thus merely to insure the safety of his letter; but under the influence of that restless impatience, which torments the minds of those who suffer.

HO

As he was returning home, an incident occurred under his eye., which not only lowered his spirits but his purse, and induced him to spare from his scanty resources more than in a cooler moment prudence would have permitted him to bestow; but in the sympathy of affliction his hand and his heart now went together.

When he arrived at his lodgings, he found himself too ill to remain up any longer. His looks alarmed his landlady. A sick stranger in a common lodging-house is always an object of apprehension to those who preside over it; and neither the distinguished appearance of O’Donne], nor the boastings of Me. Rory, bad produced such an effect on the master and mistress of the house as to render them quite easy as to the circumstances of O’Don-nel, who, beside being sick and unknown to them, was—an Irishman. The one teased him with questions—■

“ It tnere was no jriena ne wisned to send for;’" and the other so incessantly importuned him to have a physician called in, that O’Donnel on the third day consented to the proposal, and an expense was daily incurred,, which had become as necessary to the preservation of his life, as it was unsuitable to the state of his finances.

The forlorn patient was slowly recovering from a nine days fever, and had dismissed his physician, when he received the following answer to his letter, from Lord Charles Savili, dated from Edinburgh.

Sir,

I am not much in the habit of retracting my words; nor, in the instance to which you allude, can I assign any reason to myself for doing so.—Declining, therefore, the alternative you condescendingly allow me-—and leav-

V

Jng you to make what use you please of a lady’s mistake, and your own discovery,

I remain, Sir, &c. &c.

C. Savill.

This letter was put into O’Donnel’s hands on the first da}7 he had left his bed ; and his landlord expressed his surprize when his invalid lodger, giving tlie iron box and his dog once more to his care, informed him that he was going to tlie country for some days. The landlady, too, a sort of Lady Singleton in her little way, endeavored to represent to him the madness of going out at all, while still labouring under the remains of his disease; and begged to be permitted to go and ask the Doctor's advice, who had been dismissed the day before. But O’Donnel replied in so peremptory a manner, that neither husband nor wife offered any

further remonstrance or advice. On the following morning O’Donnel took his place in one of the North coaches., carrying with him what money he was master of, and a few changes of linen, in a small portmanteau.

That he had not heard from Me. Rory in the interim caused him some anxiety and uneasiness ; but he endeavored to think that his silence was the result of a tedious passage; and he v left a letter, for him with his landlord, in case he should arrive in England before his own return, which (if indeed he ever returned) was most probable.

CHAPTER 24

An early sessions bad produced an early winter in London ; and by the middle of February, most of the neighbouring villas were emptied of their splendid societies.

Lady Llanberis had left Longlands ; and/armed with her newly arrived son, his fire-eater, and his juggler, began her campaign for the season, with additional vigour, brilliancy, and fashion,

O'	%/	'

Lady Singleton was wholly engaged in forwarding the views, and multiplying the amusements of her step-son, well aware how much her own consequence in the world would depend upon her interest and influence, over the mind of a young man, who was single, and in the possession of a large estate.

ÜCIU y lUUi Y UCI V üi liClIwi itOUUJt/U 11^1

evening reading parties and literary conversations,, where every one came to exhibit, and no one was amused; where all came to be heard, and no one to listen ; where ail was effort and affectation, vanity, and ennui. The Du-chess Dowager of Belmont continued to be more talked of than known ; and., contrary to expectation, received a very limited circle at home, and went not much abroad. Her exclusiveness paved the way to her future bon-ton, the difficulty of obtaining her society considerably enhancing its value. More odd and more whimsical than ever, her originality procured her a reputation, which mere genius could not have obtained; while her cynicism, which became every day less sportive and more severe, rendered her at least as much feared as liked. Still however she was amusing : and in that she

possessed a quality adapted to the tedium and apathy of the age and circle in which she lived ; which secured her toleration, if it could not obtain popularity.

One fine frosty morning, in the latter end of February, a lady, who was walking in St. James’s Square, followed by her servant, was struck by the appearance of a fine dog, of gigantic size and great beauty; and as she ascended the steps of a house, called to the man who led him to inquire if it was for sale. The appearance of the man warranted the supposition. His figure was gaunt and meagre, his countenance haggard, and his dress that of the habiliments of poverty.

“ Is it me, Madam/’ he said, ‘''sell the dog? Oh no, Madam, I would not, by raison of it’s not being my own, but another gentleman’s.”

\

“Fray step in here, however., fora moment,” said the lady, as the hall door opened.

“ Surely I will, Madam,” replied the man, taking off his hat, and leading the dog into the hail ; while the lady bending over it, patted its head for some time in silence. Then raising her eyes, she said, “ I presume your are an Irishman/'

“ Is it me, Madam—O yes, Warn/

“ And this dog,'5 continued the lady, “ is it Irish too ?"

“ Troth, Madam, I could not tell you, barring Td tell you what I don’t know."

“ How came you by him ?’’ she asked, motioning him to follow her into an adjoining room, and shutting the door.

“ How came I by him, Ma’am. Oh, I have no call to him at all at all : onlv just when the lodger, who owns him, goes out, I don’t care to lave him behind ; for one of the childer is mighty

circlip and he's worrying the animal ever. So as the lodger took off his ould collar, I just tie this bit of a rope round his neck, and bring him out with me, when I go of an errant, and is’nt at work.”

And what is the name of the lodger?” asked the lady, still bending her head over the dog and caressing it.

“ Why then troth, I cannot tell you that, Madam, either ; and sorrow bit of me ever thought of the same till this blessed hour, so I did’nt ; but sure he is a real gentleman ; and the blessing of me and mine go with him.”

Has he been a friend to you asked the Lady.

“ Has he been a friend to me, Madam ? oh then it's himself that has,, God bless him !” and bowing low, he added, “ for you see, Madam, I am a poor county Sligo boy, that corned over to Liverpool for harvest work, four years

* Arch.—'Mischievous.

•ago; and devil a work I got, or rap I earned, only the shaking fewer, God help me. And the woman that owns me followed me, the cratur ; and the greatest of hardships we suffered undoubtedly ; until it plased the lord to send us work, and I got to be a paver, Ma’am ; first in Liverpool town, and then in London, But the times is mighty hard, and it was the will of God the childer should come fast, and troth and we were sorely pinched' to keep the life in us, so we were; ora rag to our back, God help us.”

“ Go on,” said the lady impatiently.

“ And thegentleman—he relieved you Ï suppose ?”

“ Well, Madam, as I was saying, one morning, very early, as I was at work, making up a bad step in High-Holborn, little Kateen, the biggest of the childer, and the sweetest little sowl that ever breathed the breath of life; I may say it now, God help me, that she '

is taken from me, my poor infant. Weil, one morning, little Kateen corned to me with my breakfast, as it was her custom to do, poor child : while I was finishing my drop of milk, she sat beside me on the pavement, playing jack-stones, the little jewel ! when, whisk comes by, for all the world like a flash of lightning, a corricle, and runs over the leg of my child, and smashes it to pieces, before I could bless myself; and the rogues that were in it (my curse light on them, and it will surely) never cracked cry, till they were out of sight. There I stood, for all the world as if I was stunned with a stone, leaning over my poor infant, who lay stretched for dead, as I thought, and bleeding a power, saving, your presence, Madam; and the sight fairly left my eyes, and not a stir could I stir, when a gentleman, with this same dog after him, corned by, and lifts up the child in his arms, and with-

out more to do, runs in with her to the poticary’s shop hard by, and holds her in his lap himself, the blessed virgin reward him, while the young man in the shop dressed the leg ; and seeing that I trembled like a lafe, he carried her home himself to the court : and when he asked us some questions, and found we were his country people, and sorrow poorer breathing, he gives us three guineas to pay the poticary, and help us on. But och hone! it was not God’s will to spare her to us, the jewel, so it was’nt, for she dropped off like a flower, as I may say, of that cursed mortification, that all the doctors living wouldhit cure, as they tell me. And the gentleman who owned the poticary5s shop, far from taking any thing for his trouble, gave me a guinea himself—for the English are fine people, and mighty charitable. Well, after burying Kateen, we had three pounds ten left,, and a great sum surely

it was ; and, 4 Larry/ says Judy to me (for my name is Lawrence Cologhan, Madam, at your service), f Larry / says she, 4 let us lay this up for a sore day.' And so, Madam, we turned it, and turned it, in our heads, and at last we thought what better could we do with it nor buy a feather-bed,* and a tight bit of a bed we got, that was but little worse of the wear. And we put it up in the closet in the back room, which is an excellent room any how. For, Madam, my employer lets me stay in a condemned house, in lieu of a little work I he’s doing for’m in off hours/’ 44 What do you mean by a condemn»

A. feather-bed is always considered as a

*

valuable acquisition by the lower Irish, under two points of view. First, U is looked upon as a kind of property, which may be farmed out at good interest. Having 65 a bed to Jet,’* amongst two or three lodgers, is a common mode of subsistence. Secondly, to have 44 a bed to die on,” is a mark of respectability,

ed house ?” asked the lady, who continued to walk up and down the room during this narration.

6e Why see here,, Madam, a house that is condemned to be thrown down: but, as luck would have it, my employer, who is the owner, has a differ about the primises; and when the roof was off, and the upper story nearly down, the work was stopped ; and so> till they settle the differ, he lets me keep in the bottom part, God bless him. So, Madam, when the bed was up, we thought we'd let good dry lodgings, and puts up a bi 11

cc Well, and then you got a lodger/* interrupted the lady," stepping before him.

<fOch I did Ma’am, and an excellent good 'one ; for one fine morning, a month, and more, after little Kateen’s death, who should step in, as he passed by, but the gentleman, to ax after her; and so we shewed him into the back

room, because it is far more decenter, and we touId him as much as that we had laid out his money well—the saints reward him, and were going to let dry lodgings, so we were. And to be sure, it surprized myself greatly, and Judy too, when such an iligant fine gentleman offered himself to lodge with us. And 1 little fit the place is for the likes of you, Sir,* says i : but he said, alias one, as that it would do well enough for a time ; for all he wanted was to he clune, and would never ate bit or sup under the roof, only sleep, or write a letter, or the like. And though we axed but five thirteens a week, he gave us eight; and paid us a month’s lodging in hand. But not a farthing of it but we laid out on the back room, and a pretty nate room it is. So I may*say, we’re not a tester the better for him yet; but we won't be so long, plane God; for sure, won’t it be clear gain after the first month?

and so I went for his portmanteau and things: and you see, Madam, that’s how Ï came bv this fine animal of a dog, and no wise dishonestly : for if 1M sell him, sure I’d make a good penny by him, any way, before now, so I would. But i didn’t, and never will, plase God.’’

The lady seemed lost in thought for a few seconds, and then quickly replied :

“ My good man, 1 am a countrywoman of your’s, and inclined to serve those who leave Ireland from motives

'	i

of industry, and have not been altogether os fortunate as they expected. But i have been so often imposed on, that before I oiler you or your family any assistance, I must enquire into the truth of your statement. Leave me word where you live, and I myself will visit your family; and if all is as you say, I will endeavour to be of use to you.5*

VOL. III.	i

“ You will, Madam? Why then, my blessing, and the blessing of my infants, go with you, I pray God : and was’nt it my luck, and my great luck, to meet you. Madam. And it’s where I live, Madam, is in Tucker’s-Court, in Seven-Dials ; and you can't miss the house, Madam, by raison of its being the only one in the place ; the others being fairly pulled down/’

The lady wrote down his address as he dictated it, asking as she wrote, 6' And at what time is your lodger at home, for I do not wish, my good friend, to be seen on these occasions ?” “ Indeed, Madam, mostly at night; but he is no wa) s reg’lar. But any way, there’s no fear of his being in the way, for he has no call to our bit of a room, only the ould door that’s between the two rooms ; and Judy has papered up the broken panes, so she has.”

44 Wei! then,” said the lady, opening the door, and speaking to him in the

hail, where several servants stood round the fire, tc since the dog is not your’s to part with, I cannot of course be the purchaser ; but F will go and see your family^ and if i find them worthy of my attention, they shall obtain it/’

“ Long life to 3'our Honour, Madam, and God pour a blessing on your head, amen !” With this pra3rer the Irishman left the house.

The person, who had thus formed the resolution of visiting the abode of poverty, was one, whose mingled benevolence and eccentricity had often led

%/

her thus to indulge her feelings ; sometimes at the expense of her delicacy* sometimes at the risk of lier safety: for where she discovered suffering or ivant, there she administered comfort tnd relief. This person was the Du-diess of Belmont. Her servants-* herefore, were too well acquainted vith her charitable disposition, and angular modes of gratifying it§ to feel

i %

any surprize when she ordered her chair, at four in the afternoon, and gave orders to be carried to a wretched court in Seven-Dials. At the entrance of this court she got out, and? followed bv her servant, advanced

t/	,	y

along a miserable passage, dark and gloomy from the lateness of the hour, and almost impassable from the quantity of rubbish which filled it. The only house which remained stood open. Desiring her footman to wait in the passage, she entered a little room on the right hand, which seemed one of those last resorts of wretchedness,

u Where Jowly poverty retires to die.”

It was partially illuminated by the embers of a fire, and by a light proceeding through a dismantled half glass-door. It was empty—all in the bouse was silent as death. The desolate appearance, and close and noisome air of the room, would have been perhaps

sufficient to chase avvav the benevolent /isitant, in spite of the perseverance )f charity, but that the interior of the idjo’ming apartment, seen through the >nly remaining pane of the middle loor, fixed her attention, and left her ■vithoutthe will, as without the power o move. The room was hid in darkless, save only one spot in the centre, vhere the rays of a miserable candle, vhich burnt on a table, partially dis->elled the gloom, and threw it's reel ,nd fleecy light” upon the head of u nan,-who sat writing before it. On ne side of the table lay a small iron 'ox, on the other a pair of pistols, iome sealed letters were scattered ound with other papers, and a dog lay leeping at his feet. The Duchess's land fell from the door, against which he leaned, with a faint noise. The v ri ter started, he'd ijd the candle

1	i

bove his head, looked round, and re-•laced it on the table : the dog aiso rose, I 3

but again lay down. The master paused for a moment, before he resume ed his occupation ; and in that pause, the flickering light flashing strongly on his broad forehead, discovered the countenance of O’Donnel—his dark eyes burning brightly in the shade of their sunken sockets, his complexion livid beyond its natural paleness,and in-dignation, tinctured with despair, forming the u characters,5’ of his sad brow.

After leaning for some time on his hand, in seeming melancholy reverie, he resumed his occupation, and folded and sealed the paper he had been inditing: then for some minutes fixed his eyes upon the direction, and with a sigh “ not loud, but deep dropped his head upon his hand, and remained motionless ; till suddenly starting from his seat, as if to shake off this “ slumberous agitation/’ he stood erect, and took up one of the pistols which lay upon- the table.

The Duchess saw no more—she threw open the door, rushed silently forward, and seizing* the hand thus fatally armed, held it tremblingly in her own, looking upon him in silent agitation, without power to move or articulate. He too stood aghast and motionless. His eyes, with a frenzied stare., were fixed upon her face—-his unnerved hand remained cold and powerless in the grasp of her’s—-while the dog, who at her first appearance had sprung fiercely towards her, now crouched at her feet; probably in the recollection of the caresses which she had lavished upon him in the morning. A breathless, awful silence of some minutes ensued. At last, the Duchess, drawing the pistol from his unresisting hold, laid it gently on the table, and in a low but firm voice asked, “ Am I right in supposing that Ï have providentially arrived, to prevent an attempt on your own life }'3

T A

1 ( U	U	UUft.MjJy,

Certainly not, Madam,” replied O’Donml, emphatically ; yet, while he spoke, h is looks were wild and wandering, and seemed to contradict iiis words.

These pistols—-55 said the Duchess, shuddering and averting her eyes, unable from emotion to proceed.

“ These pistols/’ he repeated, with an obvious effort to collect his thoughts, are not here, as you suppose, for the purpose of self-murder

‘c Not for self-murder !" repeated the Duchess, throwing her eyes from the pale and haggard countenance ot O’Donnel to the instruments of death, and from them to the iron box : a new feeling of horror seemed to seize lier mind, she trembled and grew pale, but spoke not.

“ Why do you tremble, Madam?5’ he asked with sternness. V» hat is it you suspect or fear? or rather, what has led you to a spot so suspicious and

I M— f	^	H

* - I -	I

of whom the master of this abode spoke with such gratitude and reverence.”

“ Well, Madam, your suspicion was, you perceive, just. 1 am the lodger with that poor and wretched person, to whom your universal charity extends itself. I am the tenant of this squalid abode, where I thought a man, who, in spite of adversity, had still preserved the spirit of a gentleman, might at least hide his head in safe and undiscovered obscurity; but! find 1 was deceived. Being then the identical person your Grace suspected, may I beg to know what are your commands?**

The Duchess stood for a moment silent; passions of a conflicting nature seemed to struggle in her mind, by the rapid changes which took place in her countenance; at last she said, with a determined air:

“ For what purposes do these pistols lie here?’*

returned O’Donne], indignantly, and, placing his hand upon his heart, he added, solemnly : 44 I pledge your Grace my honor to this assurance; but whatever are your suspicions, or your commands, 1 must intreat you to be

•	V

brief. This is not a place where a person of the Duchess of «Belmont's rank and character should be discovered. The poor people to whom this asylum of misery belongs are gone, a little while back, to the funeral of a deceased countryman, and may soon return : perhaps it were as well that pour Grace returned instantly to your equipage, and if your charity pointed :o their relief, they can at another uoment—”

44 My chanty,” interrupted the Duress, 44 led me to seek them, my in-erest to discover you ; for I came nôt iere to offer you my services, Colonel TDonnel, but to solicit î/oui** **

u In what way?” asked Q’Donnel,

in an hurried voice. “ 1 am a very

».

destitute, a very forlorn person—your Grace must mistake/’

Be you what you may,” she returned, earnestly, 6f you alone can save me from ruin !”

“ You !” exclaimed O’Donnel, eagerly, and in great emotion : “ You—[ assist, serve you! how—where? command me to the uttermost—my time, my efforts, my life.”

The Duchess turned aside her head for awhile, and covered her face with her handkerchief, then advancing towards the door, she said :

“ You are right in your observation on the impropriety of my remaining here; but if you—” she paused and sighed.

O

“ Ï will w7ait on your Grace at your own house,” he returned, quickly, understanding her meaning.

Si Can you with safety!” she de-

manded, in a tone of hesitation and anxiety.

44 Yes, certainly, with safety; for though to such places as this

4 Death and danger dog the heels of crime,*

yet I am at least free from guilt.”

44 Suppose then to-morrow/' she said.

ft JYo, not to-morrow—to-morrow I go a short journey on urgent business, and my return is uncertain ; but this evening, if your Grace will allow me.”

44 Then/' said the Duchess, eagerly : 44 this evening—this evening, at eight, i shall expect you.”

You may, Madam, I will not fail,55 he replied.

She now moved towards the door, and O’Donne! followed her with the light. She glanced her eye for a moment back on him. All the severity of his countenance was fled; his brow had lost its gloom ; a faint hectic burnt

on his cheek, and a passionate melancholy softened the sternness of his eyes : he paused at the first door.

“ I dare not light you further/’ he said : “ but I can follow vou till vou are under the protection of your servant.”

“ M37 servant awaits me in the hall,” she replied:	there	is no danger.”

O’Dounei bowed his head, and retreated to lay aside the light ; but when she had reached her chair, she perceived that he had followed her to the entrance, and his lofty figure appeared under the shadow of the arch-way, as she passed it.

CHAPTER 25

The clock of St. James’s church struck eight as O’Donnel ascended the steps of the Duchess of Belmont’s house. A servant ushered him into a drawing-room, which communicated by a folding door with a library. The servant, when he went to announce O’Donnel, left this door partly open, and 0,Donnel, to his surprise, almost to his consternation, perceived the Duchess had company : the group, which stood round a table examining some books, were strongly exhibited to him by the bright light of a pend* ing lamp : it consisted of two ladies, the one elderly and plain, the other rather young, foreign-looking, and beautiful: the only gentleman present was Lord

S----. The Duchess was in another

part of' the room, seated pensively on a sofa: the servant paused fora moment in search of her, but when he approached, and announced O*Donne!, she immediately came forward, and drawing the folding door after her without quite closing it, she approached, and offered him a hand, which, though he bowed on, he scarcely touched.

“ When you had the goodness/’ she said, u to offer me your company this evening on a business so important to my interests, I forgot to mention to vou that 1 had some friends in %/

the house with me; but when [ tell you who they are, you shall judge for yourself, and join our little party or not as you think fit. Mr. Maunsel, my uncle by marriage, an Irish lawyerofsome eminence in his profession, and of a cha-racterdistinguishedby its singleness and integrity, is come over to this country on the subject of the suit in which i

am unfortunately engaged : he is my agent as Weil as law-agent; he is, indeed, my zealous and anxious friend ; and though he has a large family, he would have been but too happy to have received me as a member of it in my less fortunate days, it i could have Submitted to dependence. He and my «met are, at present, both my guests, but he is this evening engaged to a

O	O	O

dinner with a countryman of his, high

%f	1	O

in office here. There is also a charming Florentine on a visit with me, from whom I received many kind attentions when i stood most in need of them abroad, and who placed me under the protection of the English family with whom I returned to tliis country. As

«y

for our gentleman ” she added, carelessly, who came, indeed, uninvited to dinner, you know him : it is Lord S-----, and who is, at present, attend-

ing a dying father, that has been dying these twenty \ears. And now, know-

ing of whom my little fire-side circle is composed, will you join it?”

O’Donnel, in a few cold words, de-, cidedly declined the invitation ; but his countenance was that of a man whose heart was too full for speeches or ceremonies.

The Duchess then pointed to a chair near the fire, took another herself, and rung for coffee. When the servant had retired, and a silence of some seconds had followed a few common-place observations, O’Donnel suddenly raised his eyes to the Duchess’s face, and perceived that her’s were fixed on him with an earnest and melancholy gaze.

She appeared something confused as their looks met, and said, abruptly:

4f Good heavens! Colonel O’Donnel, how changed you are : surely your health must have suffered much since 1 last saw you.’’

“ ït has suffered a little, Madam,”

he returned, with an air of increased dejection.

“ Have you passed that interval in London ?” she asked.

45	A very short portion of it. Business called me from town before I was quite recovered from a fever which confined me the day after I left Long-hinds ; and a severe relapse was the consequence,, under circumstances the most unfavorable.”

44 How do you mean ?” asked the Duchess, anxiously.

44 My iliness seized me on a distant journey in a remote and desolate situation, where little aid of any description could lie procured, when I had not even the attentions of a servant to trust to ; my recovery was, therefore, only short of miraculous.”

44 Good God !” exclaimed the Du-dtess, in great emotion : 44 but where vas your faithful Irish servant—where vas Me. Rory ?”

O’Donne] paused for a moment — his lips quivered—his eyes glistened.

“ M here he still is,” he at last replied : “in prison in Ireland, and on mv account.”

The drops fell plentcouslv from the eves of the Duchess, though she si-

*•	V-

lently struggled with her emotion.

c: Your Grace is very good/5 replied O’Donnel, “ very benevolent : poor • fellow, he is not undeserving of vour

J	V-	V

sympathy. ï hope his usual health and spirits will not desert him till something can be done for his relief. He is at present, unjustly. \ believe, a close prisoner in a jail in the north of Ireland, without money to support him, or friends to redress and assist him.’5

“ He shall have both,5’ returned the Duchess, with earnestness : *• every thing shall be done for him that can, if you will put me in possession of the facts upon which to go. Mr. Maun-

sel is a resident in the north of Ireland ; he is a person of considerable influence : he returns thither in a few days, and I shall put Me. Rory into his hands: he cannot possibly be placed in bet ter/ *

“ God bless you—God bless you !” returned O’Donne], in great emotion, involuntarily rising from his chair; and

%/	Zj	7

covering his eyes with his hands, he remained leaning in silence against the mantle-piece for many minutes.

You snail sneak of him yourself

t	«/

to Mr. Man rise]/’ said the. Duchess, c’ and give him instructions as to what steps may be taken/’

This letter,'*’ said O’Donnel, drawing one from his pocket, ^ will inform Mr. Mauusel of all the circumstances of which lam myself acquainted : it is from Me. Ilorv, and composed with his usual prolixity : it arrived during my absence from London;

unfortunately, therefore, it has remain-» ed a month unanswered/*

The Duchess took the letter, and placed it in a writing-box.

“ And now, Madam/’ said O’Donne], resuming his seat, “ that you have remover! from my mind a cause of very great and just anxiety, and given up your generous feelings to the interests of others, i beg to know in what way I may be of use in promoting your own ?” *c 1 will endeavour,” said the Duchess, recovering herself, 16 to be as succinct as possible. You are perhaps aware that the property of which your uncle defrauded you was lost by him at hazard, to the late Duke of Belmont, my husband.” O’Donnel nodded assent.

“ And perhaps you may have also learned that this Irish property, which has more than doubled its value within the last thirty years, makes nearly the

whole of my jointure,, being the only u n in tailed possession in the late Duke’s power to bequeath.”

44 I did not hear the fact, Madam,” returned O’Donnel, 44 but I thought it probable.”

44 You thought it probable,” repeated the Duchess, pointedly, 44 and you yet rejected the miserable offering which justice made to your wrongs.”

44 Which prodigal, princely generosity made to my misfortunes, you mean, Madam/’ interrupted O’Donnel, in some agitation : 44 bgt that is passed, though the gratitude it awakened can cease to exist onlv with rav life. It is.

•j	%/	j

however, your Grace’s interest, not mine, that we are at present discuss-ing/’

The Duchess shook her head, and smiled reproachfully, then, after a moment’s silence, she continued.

44 Shortly after your abrupt departure from Longlands, I returned to

town,, an cl found on my arrival a legal notice of a process commenced against . me, by a person of the name of O’Don-nel, who, though an American by birth, has revived some claims on the. property assigned by your uncle to my late husband. Although the deed of gift passed from the late Mr. Q’Dormel to the Duke is perfect, yet other deeds and papers are requisite to substantiate his right to the property, and that ot your father, his elder brother, iront whom it was so f:audu!cntiy alienated. Mr. Maunsel, as my law-agent* is come over here for the purpose ot obtaining from you, who, he learned, is the only person likely to bold such documents, if any such exist, the papers he requires ; but all research both on his part and on mine have proved abortive until this day.”

“ Well,Madam,interruptedO’Don-nel quickly, “ I have to congratulate you and myself, that the lingering

weakness or ramny priuc, may ue me means of securing you that property yoirso nobly employ. I have preserved with sanctity all that remains to me of the possessions of my ancestors. They are reduced to a few shrivelled parchments and mouldering papers; but they are sufficient to prove your right to the bequest of the Duke of Belmont, as substantiating the claims of my family to that remnant of the property which was secured to them by law. When the Revolution was finally settled, trustees were appointed to inquire into the disposal of Irish forfeitures, and for that purpose a Court of Claims was opened. The decisions of that court were in many instances fa* vorable to the Homan Catholics, and amongst others, to that branch of the CBDonnei family of which I am lineally the representative. The attempts made by another and remote branch of the family to put aside these claim» proved

VOL. nr.	k

nnortive ; ana tnougn, through the influence of the penal statutes, passed after the Revolution, my uncle found means to obtain the property of his elder brother; yet, till that period, it was unalienable; besides, I have several letters by me, which passed between my father and his uncle, the late Abbé O’Donnel, at that time in Spain» "on the claims of these American O’Don-iiels, which were made about forty years back^ and put aside in a court of equity. These letters alone would be sufficient to make good your Grace’s claims.”

“ And where,” said the Duchess, c< are these valuable papers, which are to save me from comparative indigence, to be got at ?”

fi< They are in a small iron box at my lodging,” he replied. “ It was lying

on the table when-----”

He paused in some emotion.

“ Yes,” said the Duchess, “ I per-

ceiveci that box—1 remarked it particular! v”

44 I brought it over for the purpose of carrying it with me to Germany/*

" To Germany!” returned the Duchess, in an amazement that almost amounted to consternation—“ to Germany ! ”

“ I have again,” said O'Donne^ 44 accepted, of necessity, a commission in the Austrian service; for,” he added with a melancholy smile,

64 I am sworn brother to grim Neceisttjf,”

and must obey his mandate."

44 And how soon do you leave England ?”	-	'

44 I cannot precisely say-. I do not wish to leave it without Me. Rory— but—” he paused and sighed.

14 And the papers you have offered me?” asked the Duchess.

44 Under all circumstances, shall he your's,” returned O’Donnel: 44 they

& ;S

snail De aenverea to you eariy co-morrow morning.**

Cf But Mr. Maunsel will, I am sure^ think it necessary to see you, to examine, perhaps, these papers in your presence. **

f; I hope to be able to wait on him at any time after to-morrow,5* said 0*Don-ftel.

“ May I,’* said the Duchess, with great earnestness, “ depend on this promise /**

“ If I live,” said 05Donnel, “ I pledge myself to obey any command you may honor me with.**

“ And, to-morrow,** said the Duchess, with anxiety—“ to-morrowr you leave town.*5

“ I am obliged,*5 said 0*DonneI, “ to accompany an old friend a short way into the country.5*

“ You have friends in London, then :*’

“ I have a friend whom I accident-

ail y met in a coffee-house, who served with mein the Irish brigade, and who is now happily married in this coun-

try”

“ And you are accompanying him into the country ?” repeated the Du» chess. “ Perhaps/’ she added with he» sitation, Cf on an affair of honor.”

- “ As your Grace is ignorant of his name and person,” returned O’Don» nel, “ and can make no use of the information, I may confess' to you that it is.”

46	And his unfortunate wife !”

“Is ignorant of the whole transaction.”

“ Those pistols then that I saw on your table?” asked the Duchess.

“ Are his” he replied. “ He gave them to me to get them repaired/’

“ It is a melancholy alternative,” said the Duchess.

“It is, however, generally speakingj n 3

an unavoidable one/' said O’Donnel? rising to depart.

£t I will not press upon your time/7 she replied ; “ yet, if you could remain till Mr. Maunsel’s return —” and there was a softness., a solicitation in her voice, which O’Donnel found it difficult to resist.

“1 have some business to transact to-night/’ he replied, which obliges me, of necessity, to decline your Grace’s invitation/’

“ You are not then to be seduced ?’’ she asked with a smile.

“ I hope not/’ he replied in emotion, and averting his eyes.

41 Nor even to be commanded now,” she added pointedly, alluding to a circumstance which O’Donnel but too well remembered.

64 The result of my former obedience/’ he returned, in a hurried manner, “ was not of a nature to—’’

He paused abruptly, took his hat, and added :

“ I fear I detain your Grace from your guests;0 and he moved towards the door—the Duchess followed him; and before she rung the bell, she held out her hand.

“I would ask you,” she said, smiling, i( to renew your vow of allegiance, now that I am about seriously to call upon the services of my subject, but that I know of old, how lightly he holds such vows”

O’Donnel took the offered hand, and held it for a minute in his, whiie his eyes wandered over her face and person, with an expression as wild as it was passionate ; then, suddenly dropping it, and without uttering a word, he departed.

The Duchess, under pretence of reading a letter, remained in the front drawing-room, and taking Me. Rory's voluminous epistle from her writmg-box,

TJ /I

the following account ot his mistortunc met her eyes.

Colonel,

Sir, This comes to inform your Honor, according to promise, that I was safely lodged in the county jail, last Thursday evening, to my entire amazement, little expecting that same, nor never should, plaise God, only in regard of Torney Costello, who hates the ground I walk upon, and would mur-ther me fairly, so he would, only for defending your Honor’s rights, Sir, which I will while a drop of blood runs in my veins ; and why would’ntl ? and so I’ll just be after telling your Honor the whole transaction, just as truly as if 1 was book-sworn, before a rigistered magistrate ; and if Torney Costello says to the contrary, the devil take the liars9 1 say; and that's all the harm I wish him, any how, bad as he is, the spalpeen !

So, your Honor, as I was saying, I got safe and well, Cod be praised for that same, to Liverpool, and to be sure, it's a wonderful country ! and neither poverty nor pride in it, Sir; not like our own poor island, long life to it—and every cabin along the road fit for a lord, surely, and noways ill thatch'd. Sir, and the iliganl little slips of gardens before the doors ; and pace and plenty within or without, and nobody caring whether it’s to mass or church a body goes, as I hear tell from a young man on the top of the coach, only quite agreeable through-other, .which is remarkable! Why, then, Sir, I won. der what it is makes the differ between the countries: for sure they say Ireland bates the world, in regard of the soil, to say nothing of the beautiful rivers, and every convainience in life, which there is, surely; and what is most par« ticular, and mighty extraordinary., is that for all that, one half of the inhabi-

rr ' A

ianis lives in London, that’s the qua* lity, and the other half is in America, or, like your Honor, fights in foreign parts; and them that is left at home, is neither contint or satisfied, but quite the contrary; that is some of them. Sir: so as 1 am telling your Honor, Sir, we landed safe in Lough Foyle, and a great passage we had, surely; and I thought, Sir, I heard Me. Swine’& Gunbefore we were half ways, but I did’ot, only the ropes when I was asleep, Sir, and it being Sunday, I thought I'd get mass at our saint’» place,*)* before 1 left the County Derry, and so I valk’d to Cluainenagh.% three miles from Derry Walls, and put up a sincere prayer for your Honor, and ail your undertakings, Sir, and then I

* See note at the end of the volume.

+ St. Cjlumb-kill.

J This abbey '.vas founded by St. Columb-kill. It is now a chapel.

thought I’d step across the country to our own place; and where should I light the first night, but at Brian Dog-herty’s, and a hearty kind welcome they gave me, God reward them, and ould Mary, the cratur! troth, Colonel, you’d think she’d ate me up alive with the joy, for sure, Sir, they turn’d her out inti rely from the prim ices, as you shall hear. Sir, in due time ; and she bid me tell your Honor she left the place nate and clane after her ; and that the fine ancient ould gentlewoman, your aunt, died a great Christian; and left her curse on Corney Kelly, her thriving nephew ; and her elegant gold cross to Father Murphy, to bury her; and she desired him to let you know she was dead, Sir, and hopes you will put a storie at her head ; aged seventy ; she having no ability to do that same :

O	7

and so, the next morning, 1 set off from Brian’s before sun-rise, and reached the place, just on the turn of the evening,

and a poor wilderness ot a place it? looked ; and it was’nt with dry eyes saw it again ; God knows it was’nt and the door lying open just in the ould way ; so I turns into your Honor’s own room; and who should I see writing before a fine turf fire, (the last sods ever we cut, Sir, in Muckish Bog,) but 7or~ neij Costello; and troth, the heart sunk fairly within me, when I saw him there; and I shew’d him my instructions, in your Honor’s own hand, and tells him it’s little I expected to find him there, any way, but mighty civilly ; and that I’d just trouble him to quit the primises if he plased, his horse being saddled under the ould tree.

But I just wish your Honor had seen the face he had on him, when he turned round and saw me. He was as white as the paper he was writing on ; and saized the poker, Sir, and asked what call had I to him? and that if I did’nt make off he’d lodge me neck and heels

an the county jail: ana tnat ne naa taken possession of the ti ni ment in right of his client, Cornelius Kelly, Esq. and that he would’nt stir a foot until Cornelius came borne from fishing on the Lough ; and with that he brandishes the poker in a most uncommon way; and so 1 just tells him, mighty civilly, that it was a folly to talk; that neither he nor Corney Kelly, Esq. had, any call in life to the primises, only your Honor, who was the real and undoubted owner ; and that as my master,, Colonel O’Donnel, had sent me to get possession and sell the place, before he went to foreign parts, that I must trouble him to quit, or I must be after shewing him the way out, in a manner that might’nt be quite agreeable; upon which he bids me touch him if I dare, and that if I came within a yard of him, he’d swear the pace against me, and have me transported for an assault; and that your Honor was no colonel,

but a rrench crimp and a spy, and no gentleman. O ! then, devil a much he said after that, any how, for 1 quietly lavs down my bit of a twig, and, springing on the fellow, before he could bless himself, 1 wrings the poker out of his hand, and taking him up quietly in my arms, though he wriggled like an eel, Sir, and almost bit the ear off me, Colonel, before he knew where he was, I had laid him down quietly on the wrong side of the door, which 1 barr’cl fast to, and threws him out his hat and his papers from the little window in the loft, wishing him safe home, and I hears him gallop off, Sir, quick enough, I'll'engage; and then I shut up the house, and was going to lie down upon your Honor’s bed, having washed the blood off my ear, when a great rapping comes to the door, and sure enough it was Corney Kelly, Esq. as he tould me himself, when 1 ax’d who he was ; but I gave him a bit of advice not to lose

time, as the night was could, but to follow Torney Costello; and, troth, and I’ll always say that for him, that he is mighty ’cute at a hint, for ï saw him running as if the devil was at his Irak-eens,# that’s through the little loft window, Sir, in the gable. And so making down a fire, I fell fast asleep, and dreamed I was hag-ridden, and that Mrs. Honor Kelly had a fast gripe of me; Christ preserve us! And sure enough, I was not much out, Sir, for when 1 waken'd, who should I see houlding me fast but old Barney Me. Guire, the constable, and two other young men, and Torney Costelloat the foot of the bed, and Corney Kelly.— And sure they would’nt scarcely give me time to put o«, but hurried me away to Torney Costello’s ofhee, and

* Metaphysically, heels—literally, stockings ■without feet, generally worn by the Irish peasantry.

swore examinations against me for au assault ; for since we quit the country, your Honor, Costello is made a registered magistrate, and was chief evidence against me to himself: and then I was walked off to the county jail, and reached it the next evening. And you would’nt think, Colonel, that the little loft window was the cause of it all, bad luck to it, in respect of their getting in through it, which was what I never dreamed of, Sir; but an honest man is no match for them thieves of the world. And so, your Honor, here I am, a close prisoner, at this present writing, Sir, without one friend near me, good or bad, to see me righted, Colonel ; only your Honor, who is far away ; God help me! And sure, Sir, may’nt they hang me fairly, or transport me; troth they may, and nobody ever know a word about it, barring myself and themselves ; for Torney Costello tould mein his office that I was a

mark a man, sir, ana my sister ana brother-in-law too ; and that he had his eye on us long since, only waited for a fair opportunity. Them is his own words, if I was dying, Colonel ; and I trust in God and your Honor to relieve me, and not to let me rot in a jail? Sir, nor starve alive, which I’m likely to do, in regard of not having a rap to crass myself with, only the jail allowance, which is bread and water, Sir ; by reason of my giving half what I had left of my travelling expincis to poor Mary, Sir, not waiting for the price of the place, to do that same, as your Honor bid me ; and leaving the rest in

7	O

my little bundle, with my silver gilt watch, at the cottage; for nota rag, Sir, they’d let me stop to take with me, nor to look for my bundle, only my hat ; and sure one was no match against Jive> any how; and what could I do, Colonel ? And so I’m to be tried and found

^ vl I I vj' ü I t UC uC A I ft	2 ^ 11 5 VV i 11 lx v U11J ÇC5

on this clay six weeks as I hear tell : and may be your Honor will be in Germany before that day, Sir, and why would’nt you ? Sure I could’nt expect you'd stay back for the likes of me ; God fobid : and whatever comes of it, Colonel, I invite all the saints of Heaven to pray for you and bless you, Colonel, to the ind of time ; and grant you a happy death, and a long life and prosperous. And whatever happens to me, dead or alive, the last prayer ever I'll utter, will be a blessing on your head, Sir, any how, for your great kindness to me and mine, who am,

Your Honor’s Humble and faithful Servant, and most loving foster-brother,, Pii ÀIDRIG (alias)

Patrick Me. Rory.

iV. x).-—I hope your Honor s goodness will excuse the great liberty in regard of Martha, the cratur ! to tell her, Sir, that if she never sees me again, Vis no fault of mine, only my misfortune:—but not to grieve her, Colonel, by telling her my mishap; for what use is there in it; and that I hope she’ll keep the two gold pieces I gave her for my sake, and make what use she plases of them ; and that I don’t write to her for a raison I have, she not knowing how to read. And in respect to Bran, the baste ! I hope your Honor will look to him yourself, and that the next boy you get, Sir, will take as good care of him as I did ; and troth, and I’d share my last bit with him this moment, my poor animal. Which is all at present from. Colonel, your humble and loving servant,

P. M.

N. B,*—I did’nt tell your Honor

tnat my sister, and James îviuiioy, ner husband, went for America the very weekbeforel got here, in respectofgreat hardships; and they tell me it’s a great place—and sure, Colonel, the bradât hen is there to this day, and roosts under the chimney of your Honor’s room, in the thatch, Sir; and onld Mary says that the neighbours will never be persuaded, Sir, but she’s Mrs. Honor Kelly,# in regard of flying in the face of Corney Kelly, the first day he put his foot in it; which ould Mary will take her book oath of—Och ! but she’s an uncommon bird!

P. S. 1 send this in two letters, Colonel, divided to save the double postage ; not that your Honor would grudge it. Sir, only there’s little use in throwing away money these hard times.

P. M. *

* A belief in those sort of transmigration is a common superstition in Ireland.

CHAPTER 26

On the following morning, at an early-hour, the iron box, accompanied by a note to Mr. Maunsel, was delivered to the Duchess’s porter; and her Grace was engaged with her uncle in examining the curious and ancient deeds, and other documents among theO’Don-nel papers, when a servant came into the study, to inform her that Lady Singleton was in her dressing-room, and requested to see her upon urgent business. This was a tiresome inter® ruption, and the Duchess with great reluctance obeyed it.

Lady Singleton was walking up and down the room in some perturbation.

“ Well/’ she said, fC my dear Lolott, here is a fine business] You have no*

idea how annoyed I am: I know Ï shall be brought into the scrape. Neither Lady Llanberis nor the Savill family will ever forgive me for bringing forward this person. She is the least reasonable of all human beings, and the Savills are the victims of prevention: so that if this unfortunate man is hanged, for the murder of Lord Charles----- —”

44 What man ?” asked the Duchess, in great alarm.

“ Why, this unfortunate Irish O’Don-nel, w horn I so unluckily presented at Longlands, merely to gratify Lady Llanberis’s whim about odd people; for after all, one must keep well with persons of her influence, to get on at all, when one is not at the head of a great establishment. But if I am cited to appear on the triai, I shall certainly

give the counsel a hint, which may--

Good Heavens, Duchess! what, what is the matter ? W hy, you are as pal©

as death ! and there is a frightful blackness about your mouth and eyes.”

The Duchess faintly smiled, but sat motionless in her chair. Lady Singleton emptied a bottle of eau de luce on her face, and was about to ring the bell for assistance, when the Duchess recovering by the violent remedy applied to her senses, cried:

“ No, no, don't ring; I am well, quite well, only a little surprized, goon. Let me hear.”

ce Then you have not heard of the duel between Lord Charles and Colonel CLDonnel/'

“ Duel!" repeated the Duchess: “ and Lord Charles was killed?”

Lady Singleton now paused, and fixed her eyes with a look of penetrating curiosity on the Duchess's face: observing in a pointed manner:

14 Who would have thought that you would have had so much feeling for a nephew who never owned you as a re-

lation ; and who has more than once said to me, 4 My dear Lady &mgletony that little gouvernante of your’s-”

“ Is Lord Charles Savill killed ?” interrupted the Duchess, with great vehemence of manner.

44 Well, you shall hear. I was just sitting down to breakfast, when Mr. Dexter, who, by the bye, is getting on

amazingly with the N—------*s, called in,

and told me, with great horror at the whole transaction, that as he was calling at Belmont House, to leave his letter of introduction for the Duke, who is but just returned with poor dear Lord Charles from Scotland, he met the body of Lord Charles, carrying out of a coach into the great hall at Belmont House; that he had a sight of the General and several surgeons, but that he could not get to speak to any of them ; and only learnt from some of the attendants, that Lord Charles had fallen in a duel with an

*risn genneman or cue name or u uon-nel, who was taken into custody on the spot ; which shews that there was some foul play, as Mr. Dexter says. So, luckily, my carriage was at the door, and I drove off to Belmont House-—but no admittance there : and no positive account of the affair, nor any intelligence whatever, save that the surgeons were probing the wound*

atnd that-------

“ Then he is not killed ?” exclaimed the Duchess, breathlessly.

44 Well, who would have expected this sensibility from you?” asked Lady Singleton, 44 whom 1 always thought»--------”

Pray go on,” interrupted the Duchess.

44 Well, I theyi drove to poor dear Lady Llanberis’s, who, after all, if Lord Çharles dies, will be the person to be pitied; for their marriage was a settled thing ; but she had just gone with Lady t©l, in,	x

Mary to Belmont House. I saw her own woman, who told me she was grieved and afflicted a Voutrance—and was quite wild. She had also, I learnt, sent for me,

1	in	the first instance, but whether to re-

proach, or condole with me (forshehates to be alone, when she has a grand crise d'emotion), I cannot guess. However, Ï left a line for her, to say I would not go home till I had seen her; and that I would not leave the Square, but remain with you till she returned.”

The Duchess now, in a composed tone, inquired if Colonel O’Donnel was in custody, with whom, and where. But before Lady Singleton could answer, the door opened., and a servant announced the Countess Lianberis; and her Ladyship, rushing into the room, fell into a chair, and burst into a violent fit of tears.

Lady Singleton hastened to her friend’s assistance, .prodigal of all the eaux, essences, and esprits on the Du-

digal of consolations and regrets, invectives and dictations. But Lady Llanberis, suddenly recovering, exclaimed :

“ If any thing should really happen to Lord Charles, I must say that you* Lady Singleton,-----”

4 6 Then he is not even in imminent danger?^ asked the Duchess.

4<r Not, I believe, in such imminent danger as was at first supposed ; but I have left word at my house for General Savill to follow me here, who promised to come in half an hour and tell every thing.3'

44 And Colonel O’Donnel ?” said the Duchess.

“ O ! he, the wretch Î he is safe enough, I dare say. He is gone off: at least no one knows any thing about him. He’ll lake care of himself.’3

The Duchess leaned her face over the Isack of her chair, from which she had sl 2

risen ; ana Liaay imanDcris couiiuueu with great vehemence of manner and gesture :—

♦	“ If any thing should happen to poor

dear Lord Charles, I shall certainly look upon you, Lady Singleton, as the cause.—I shall indeed/'

“ Upon me! Lady Llai^er'is?’* returned Lady Singleton, coloring.

Cf Yes, certainly, upon you. Lady Singleton : with your tales of wonder about kidnapped chiefs, and the Castle of Dublin, and his fighting a whole German legion, and all that nonsense, at which poor dear unfortunate Lord Charles used to laugh till he was ready to die. He said from the beginning that Q’Donnel was some adventurer, with his air of 6 hero d*opera; but you would have him from Ireland ; he was then, you know, quite your engouement outré”

“ Your engouement outré, your Ladyship means/' returned Lady Single-

ton, struggling between temper and policy. “You would not let me speak of any other subject, after I first, by chance, mentioned him to amuse you, because you are so partial to out of the way people, of odd and extraordinary adventures: and as to O’Donnel’s, I only mentioned them to you as I heard them myself.*’

“ O ! yes; mentioned, - Lady Singleton ; but you must know the man was no more the thing you described, at least that I expected. He was, I think, pretty much like other persons, but not the very least amusing, if you mean that; indeed quite the contrary : and if he even was, as no one knew the'least in the world about him, one did not quite desire to see him niche in one’s family in the manner that he was. However, as you invited him over, you know, Lady Singleton, one was obliged to abide by it, not expecting that he was to cut every body's throat

v JJvA H»

in the end who did not do hlm homage, as Lady Mary says/’

“ /invite him over I Lady Llanbe-ris/* repeated Lady Singleton., in a tone of great vexation : “ I invite Colonel .O’Donnel ! Was it not by your own particular and earnest desire ? Had I not three expresses of a day on the subject ? had I not too—^

“ O ! yes, expresses; but that happens to be nothing to the purpose, my dear Lady Singleton ; just nothing at all : for it was then? you know, a question about those French plaj^s. You, yourself, you must remember, cast him the part of Orosmane; you really cannot deny that, I hope ; and as you vvere at that time mistress of the me-xus-plaisirs at Longlands, you managed every thing vour own way/'

Jllenus-plaisirs/’* repeated Lad} Singleton, struggling with her temper.

^ I am sure I wish from my soul I never had interfered at all, for this is

generally the way one is served in the , end by you great ladies/'

“ Well, Lady Singleton, I wish you never had interfered, with all my soul: we should then have known nothing of this Irish duellist, and poor Lord Charles !”

Here the contest was broken up by the entrance of a servant, who informed Lady Llanberis that General Savill was in the drawing-room, and had called by her order.

“ Oh!" said Lady Llanberis, “shew him up, by all means. I suppose, Duchess, you will give me leave/'

“ Certainly,” said the Duchess, and flew out of the room, to receive him herself. He was answering some question she had asked, when they entered the room together.

“Oh ! my dear General,5' exclaimed Lady Llanberis, bursting into tears, as she gave him her hand ; “ this is an horrid business—good Heavens! was tliera

r. lL

ever any thing so unfortunate. Pray tell me every thing.—Lady Mary communicated to me the contents of your note, but that was written two hours back.—I sent to three surgeons and a physician myself—did the}7 arrive in time? How is Lord Charles? Why would not the Duke see me? Is that blood-thirsty Irishman in custody? Pray, General, tell me every thing : I have a right to inquire. The husband of my late dearest friend—the woman on earth I loved best : I speak not of my own personal regard for Lord Charles; of the great friendship that subsists between us, if----99

Here the violence of her Ladyship'» tears, and a slight tendency to hyste» ric affection, interrupted her words, and gave the General, after a little pause, an opportunity of answering some of her questions.

“ Colonel O’DonneJ,” he said, “ is not in custody, nor is Lord Charles m

the imminent danger your Ladyship supposes ; neither is the Colonel, I assure you, a blood-thirsty Irishman. IIis conduct throughout the whole transaction has been fair, cool, and honorable. Upon the whole,53 he added, “report has exaggerated and distorted the facts most amazingly.3’

“ Well, then,33 said Lady Llanberis, suddenly drying her tears, and resuming her air of composure, “ since, General, our dear friend is out of all danger, and one may hope the best, I beg you will relate the whole affair, from beginning to end : now pray be circumstantial. When nothing very serious comes of a duel, it is a very interesting thing, and nobody can raconte better than you, General, when you please.33

tc Yes/3 said Lady Singleton, lc I should like to know if what 1 heard was' strictly true about Lord Charles’s jealousy.33

T. A

tf Pray, General,” said the Duchess, earnestly,, who had hitherto preserved a profound silence, “ pray go on.”

“ The cause, then, of this unlucky ■affair,” returned the General, “ was ft lady’s giddiness.”

“ Indeed !” said Lady Llanberia, drawing her chair closer to the fire, and looking at Lady Singleton. “ He certainly ought not, I mean this O’Don-nel, to have been thrown at the heads of people in the manner he has been, without any one’s knowing who, or what he was. A lady’s giddiness, General ! go on—you see, Lady Singleton.” “ Yes,” said the General : “ Lord Charles had not conceived a very favorable impression of Colonel O’Donnel ; from what cause, it would be now useless to enquire ; and with more candor than prudence, he gave his opinion of Colonel O'Donnel, in a letter to a lady, who put this very letter into the Colonel's own hands.

“ indeed!^ said Lady Singleton, hrowing her eyes on Lady Llanberis: 4 thank Heaven, it was not me. I lever was tracassiere : among all my

O

àults, I have always kept clear of hat”

“It was no tracasserief’ said the Ge“ »eral ; “ it was pure mistake on all sides, fou, Lady Singleton, sent a commis* ion to Colonel O’Donnel, in a letter to ^ady Llanberis. Lady Llanberis put i part of Lord Charles’s letter into your mvelop, and gave it by mistake foi-four’s to Colonel O’Donnel, who very îaturally read it under the same erro-îeous impression.” tc Who, I did this !° exclaimed Lady Llanberis in amazement, but still not displeased. “ How very odd—it maybe, :hough, as }Tou say, General, for I never iince thought of the letter, the com mission, ColonelO’Donnel, or evenpoor Lord Charles’s opinion "of him ; which îowever, I now remember was pretty

severe ; for I think he said he was a swindler, or something very like it. Do you know this is quite a sort of a dramatic incident, and altogether not un-entertaining ; yet, if any thing melan-'dioly really comes of it, I shall always lay it down to the account of your tire-some Irish horses, Lady Singleton.”

" I think you had better lay it to the account of your Ladyship’s usual inconsequence about letters,” replied Lady Singleton, “ which I have so often cautioned vou against.”

f4 Pray,, General, proceed,’* said the Duchess, with great earnestness.

“ The Colonel’s conduct upon this occasion,” continued the General, “ was such as might be expected from a man of feeling and spirit.”

“ Poor man !” interrupted Lady Llanberis.

“ He called upon Lord Charles, by letter, to retract his words, or assign the tacts upon which his opinion had been

founded. Lord Charles refused both ; and Colonel O’Donnel, not perfectly recovered from a severe fit of illness, followed his Lordship to Edinburgh. When he arrived there, Lord Charles had proceeded towards the Highlands with his agent, to take possession of the .estates left him by his late uncle. Colonel O’Donnel, having obtained his address , followed him. During the whole of his journey to the N orth, he hadstrug-gled against the return of a disease,, -which was preying on him when he left London : and within two stages of Lord Charles’s residence, in a wretched mountain village, he was seized with so violent a fever, that his senses deserted him, and his life was despaired of by the hosts of the little cabaret where he had stopped. In this situation he was found by a Scotch clergyman, travelling through the village, who sent to the nearest town whence a physician could be procured. After three weeks confine-

ment, youth, and a good constitution, prevailed over the disease, and Colonel O’Donnel was enabled to proceed on hisroute. This I had from himself. He is indeed much changed.”

“ Poor man ! Poor man !” exclaimed Lady Llanberis with a deep sigh: u he has been altogether very ill-used.”

“ On arriving at ----- Castle,” con-

tinued the General, tf he found that Lord Charles had left it a week before* for England, and in the latter end of the ensuing week, he arrived himself iu London, and an old brother officer, a Major Mac Carthy, delivered his cartel to Lord Charles Savill. Lord Charles did not conceive himself called upon to meet a person whom he did not know to be a gentleman ; and I, as his Lordship’s friend, was deputed to see Colonel O’Donnel at the coffee-house, where he had given his address, to explain to him Lord Charles’s scruples, well aware that the Colonel had it in his power to an-

swer and remove them. In the first instance he was rigidly unbending. He refused ail proofs, all testimonies of his being by birth, what, in my opinion, he evidently is by education, by conduct, anci man ners—a gentleman. À11 ast, his friend, who was present at our interview, uniting his solicitations to mine, he reluctantly gave up a letter, written in his favor from the Emperor of Germany to the Queen of France, mentioning him as an accomplished Irish gentleman, of illustrious descent, who had ieft his country from the circumstances of religious disqualification, and who was kinsman to the late Field-Marshal O’Donnel, to whose military exploits Austria stood so highly indebted. The Imperial Seal was attached to this letter, and that of course was sufficient. This morning the meeting took place : of the unfortunate consequences you are aware. It is but fair, however, to mention that Colonel O’Donnel’s conduct

was equally distinguished by spirit and sensibility. A man of firmer nerves in a similar situation I never saw ; but when Lord Charles fell, that firmness deserted him. He flew in great agitation to his assistance—he supported him in his arms, while we were preparing the means of conveying him to town ; and though he said but little, for his emotion was deep and silent, yet that little was at once feeling and manly;”

Cf He is an amazingly fine creature,1’ said Lady Llanberis, wiping away her fast falling tears. “ He is, indeed, quite an hero ! If any thing happens to him in consequence of this unfortunate affair, I shall never forgive myself, and my iw-consequence. But nothing can happen, nothing will, and I trust, before long, I shall have him and Lord Charles together once more at my house; for there is no reason in the world why they should not become great friends in future. So that upon the whole, my shew-

ing the letter by mistake, was not so unlucky a thing as at first one thought.”

“ Nor my tiresome Irish horses so much to blame/' said Lady Singleton, with point ; “ and I think after all. Lady Llanberis, this adventure, with bis air à*Hero d*opera, is the true Cros-mane.”

The General now arose, and the two ladies first remembered that the Duchess had hurried out of the room on a servant’s putting a note into her hands, and had not returned. Lady Singleton shook her head, and looked full of meaning, Lady Llanberis fixed her eyes upon her, and asked : “ What is the matter, Lady Singleton ?”

“ Merely some odd ideas that have come into my head,” returned Lady Singleton, smiling.

Dismiss your carriage, then, and come home with me in mine/' said Lady Llanberis.

Lady Singleton consented, and the General handing them to the carriage, they took leave and departed.

The note put into the Duchesses hands ran as follows:

“ Colonel O’Donnel presents his compliments to the Duchess of Bel-mont. Being permitted to return to town this day, an event on which lie • could not depend when he had the honor of seeing her Grace last night, he begs to suggest the necessity of hijs immediate interview with Mr. Maunsel, as circumstances may render Colonel O’Donnel less master of his own time than he is at this moment. Colonel O’Donnel is now at the Coffeehouse, Mary-le-bone, and will remain there until four o’clock to receive Mr. Maunsel’s commands.”

Wednesday, Two o’Clock.

Coffee-house.

In consequence of this note, Mr. Maunsel waited upon O’Donnel within an hour after its receipt; and without referring to the event of the morning, entered at once as a man of business upon the affair which brought them together. To many questions relating to the O’Donnel property, and the deeds, in examining which he had passed the morning, he received full and explicit answers : he declared,, however, that the presence of O’Donnel would be indispensably necessary, as an important evidence, not only to attest some facts on oath, of which he was master, but to swear to the hand- ' writing of his grand-uncle, the Abbi O’Donnel, and to his own father’s.

“ The assizes,’’ said Mr. Maunsel,

44 open in the town of ***, where the

cause will have its first trial earlv in

«/

the ensuing month. I leave London for Ireland to-morrow. My wife re>-

mains with the Duchess till I come back for her, some time lienee : her 'seat in my chaise is at your service. I have a place within twenty miles of

the town of —..., and I hope, for the

sake of the accommodation, as well as for the pleasure which your society will confer on me, that you will have the goodness to remain my visitor as long as you stay in Ireland. Perhaps, too,” he added, “ Colonel O’Donnel, it may be no faint inducement to you to accompany me back to Ireland, that you can be on the spot yourself to assist me in releasing the worthy Me. Rory, whose letter has interested me for his own sake, poor fellow; and in punishing the delinquency of Mr. Costello ; and if you still persist in disposing of your romantic little domain among the mountains of Lough Swilly, I shall be glad to become a purchaser; for I have accidentally seen it since you left the

country, and, in common with Lorney Kelly, Esq. have cast on it a longing ?ye for a fishing lodge.’*

To all this O’Donnel slightly inclined his head, and when Mr. Maunsel had ceased to speak, after a pause of some minutes passed in deep rumi* nation, he abruptly said :

“ Well, Sir, if my presence in Ireland can in any way forward the interests of the Duchess of Belmont, I will attend you : name your time.”

“ To-morrow, at eight o’clock in the morning, I propose starting.”

“ Then I shall be here ready to accompany you,” said O’Donnel.

“ Have you a servant with you ?” said Mr. Maunsel.

“ No,’* said O’Donnel, slightly coloring: fc I have only a very favorite and faithful dog, who will follow the chaise.’’

“ O! Bran, I suppose,” said Mr. Maunsel, smiling.

“ ilovv did you know ms name r asked O’Donnel, eagerly.

“ By Me. Rory’s tender recollection of him,” replied Mr. Maunsel.

O’Donnel sighed, and having expressed himself obliged by Mr. Maun-sePs hospitable invitation, accepted of it, during his stay in Ireland,, and thanked him for his intended interference in the case of Me. Rory. He promised to be ready at the appointed hour, and Mr. Maunsel took hi? leave.

He had not been gone many minutes, and O’Donnel was still walking-up and down the room in great perturbation of mind and spirits, and occasionally throwing his eyes over % newspaper which he held in his hand, when his friend, Major Mac Carthy, was announced. He had, atO’Don-nel’s request, been at Belmont House, to learn how things were going.on, smd now brought the welcome tiding*

to O uonnei tnat tne nan nad oeen extracted without much danger or difficulty; that he had seen General Savill, who gave the most favorable accounts of the patient, and had made many handsome observations on O’DonneFs conduct.

u So far so well !” said O’Donnel ; then, after a short pause, he drew a diamond ring from his finger, and with an air of affected carelessness, he asked:—“ Mac Carthy, do you remember this ring ?”

“ Yes, I think so : it is the ring-given you by the Queen of France, that made such a coxcomb of you at the siege of

“ The same,” saidO'Donnel. “Whai do you think it is worth ? Observe, I don’t mean in the eyes of an officer of the French "brigades, who has an almost religious devotion to the Royal Family of France, but intrinsically*’

\

major mac i^artny tooii uie ring, and replied :

44 Faith, O’Donnel, I am not a judge of these things; but 1 should suppose it worth eighty or a hundred pounds. I would be glad to give double the sum. for the sake of the relic. I saw her who bestowed it/* he added, with emotion, 44 token she first rose above the horizon, decorating and cheering the elevated sphere she began to move in, glittering like the morning star, full of life, and splendor, and joy/'

64 And little,5' said O’Donnel, catch* ing the enthusiasm, 44 did we then drearfr that we should have lived to have seeip such disasters fallen upon her, in a natioh of gallant men, in a nation of men of honor, and of cavaliers

44 Give me the ring,” he cried, snatch*

* Burke.

mg it eagerly : fC I cannot part with it* though I perish with want/’

Major Mac Carthy seized his hand.

“ Part with it, O’Donnell Perish for want I you ! Great God ! Have you then no recollection of the ties which mutual misfortune once bound round us? Have we not fought together amidst hundreds of our exiled coun* t^men, mourning the wounds which bled—not in defence of our own dear land ? Have we not escaped together from anarchy and carnage, and beeo

exposed alike to the same vicissitudes,

»

to which religious and political disqualifications at home, and revolutionary horrors abroad, subjected us ? and yet, has your false pride concealed your wants from a friend whom fortune has now placed beyond the reach of adversity. Fie, fie upon it, monColonel. Must a man be a general to be permitted to oblige you ? Will you not stoop fcq receive a kindness from your poor

VOL. III.	*t

old major, who often stood cap in hand to receive your orders before your tent ?”

“ My Dear Mac Carthy,” said O’Donnel, shaking his hand, and in an emotion which he endeavoured to conceal by an air of pleasantry—“ the fact is, I have in the course of my short life tasted of almost every ill but two, and of those I am determined to keep clear till the last—debt and dependence ; and I will not now borrow money even from you ; therefore, have I concealed from you my real situation, which, after all, is but that of hundreds of my countrymen all over Europe: the esquisse of the story is simply this:—I was, as I mentioned to you, on the point of joining my cousin Q’Donnel’s regiment in Germany, when this business with Lord Charles Savill took me into Scotland, and the long journey, the long time that elapsed, and two severe fits of illness which required

lilCLll uCli W»j<51i3lCllJ’-L ^	^	v UAIIClUOluli IliC

little funds which I had intended for my journey to the continent, that, on my arrival last week in town, I was master of but three guineas in the world: two of these I paid in advance to the wretched master of a wretched hovel, where I have hid my head at night : and the other guinea has kept me in coffee and biscuits at this house* The moderate resources I expected from Ireland are still delayed by the imprisonment of my servant and foster brother, who went over to receive them ; and I was now reduced to the necessity of parting with this ring, which, through all my difficulties, I had still preserved, when it struck me that perhaps you would lend me on it a small sum sufficient to-------”

“ Come along, my dear Colonel," «aid Mac Carthy, taking him by the arm: “come with me to Coutts’s: I

m %

win lend you two, three, tour hundred pounds on your ring/’

“ No/' said O’Donnel, smiling, <f I will borrow on it but half its own intrinsic value, whatever that may be."

Major Mac Carthy endeavoured to expostulate, but O'Donnel was inexorable, and Mac Carthy was obliged to submit with a sulky reluctance, strongly contrasted to the former animation of his naturally animated manner. O’Donnel gave him the ring until in happier times he could release it, and received in return fifty pounds. He informed his generous friend of his being obliged to set off for Ireland on the following day, on a subpoena to attend a trial, and also in the hope of releasing his faithful Irish servant, and recovering his little property out of the hands of a swindler.

As O’Donnel had refused to dine at Major Mac Cartby's house for many

reasons, the friends then parted in mutual emotion ; for their accidental meeting had revived many faded ideas, and awakened many endearing associations, which time, absence, and vicissitude, had lulled into forgetfulness*

CHAPTER 27

The following morning, Mr. Maun-sel’s carriage was at the * * * coffeehouse to the moment of the appointment, and drove up as O’Donnel, followed by Bran, and Lawrence Cologan, carrying his portmanteau, approached the door. O’Donnel had been a little after day-light at Lord Charles Savilfs house, to inform himself of his state. Lord Charles had passed a good night, and was doing as well as possible. When the two gentlemen were seated in the chaise, the conversation turned on the duel of the preceding day, which was now an open subject of discussion, having found its way into tli« papers of the preceding evening; but vthat subject exhausted, no other was

started. U Donnel, during the rest ot that day’s journey, was sunk into profound reverie; he sighed frequently, and when addressed by his companion, started like a man suddenly awakened from a disagreeable dream : Mr. Maun* sel, therefore, forbore to disturb his moody meditations after the second stage, and amused himself with a book he had luckily put into the pocket of the chaise.

During the second day’s journey, Mr. Maunsel, without any apparent effort to draw his companion from his melancholy musings, talked to him rather than with him, and imperceptibly won upon his attention, and dissipated his reserve, till monosyllables swelled into sentences, and mere rejoinders flowed into dialogue.

O

O’Donnel, whose thoughts wet© full of “ busy matter’* when he had first met Mr. Maunsel, saw only in

m 4

the Irish lawyer a zealous bustling man of business; he now, however, upon a more intimate acquaintance, discerned in him a rare combination of shrewd acuteness of mind, and humorous simplicity of manners, which finely reflected on each other, borrowing and lending effect: very fluent and a little quaint, he made his points tell in conversation, as much by the originality of the phrase, as the strength of the idea, evidently more indebted to native sagacity than to foreign acquirement: always humorous, sometimes witty, he exhibited an intimate knowledge of the folly and errors of human nature, rather than an acquaintance with its turpitude and its vices; and illustrating his experience with more playfulness than gravity, he sketched by a trait, and painted by a word, what a paragraph might have failed to delineate, or a page to describe : more

courteous than polished* more cordial than refined, his manners were yet as easy and as unconstrained as his conception was quick and apprehensive : a rich and unaffected brogue seemed so peculiarly to belong to his style of character, that the man and his accent appeared made for each other : and O’Donnel, as they grew more intimate, became more interested and pleased with the conversation and society of the Irish barrister, a character which individually holds so-high a consideration in the best society of the country, and which, taken as a body, is universally supposed to concentrate so much of the talent, the knowledge, and the probity of the nation..

As the travellers, mutually satisfied with each other, were crossing the Welsh mountains, O’Donnel, after a pause, which had accidentally occurred in conversation, drew a newspaper M 5

from his pocket, and was reading some paragraph with great attention, when Mr. Maimsel asked him if there was any news.

“ It is an ©Id paper/’ he replied : " a fortnight'old, I believe. I have been looking over a passage that concerns the Duchess of Belmont/’

This was the first time her name had been mentioned since their journey. Mr. Maunsel took the paper, and read as follows :

“ If we are to draw any inference from the frequency of an Earl's carriage, with an S under the coronet, being before the door of a certain Dowager Duchess, in ...... Square,

we should suspect a matrimonial alliance to be carrying on in that quarter, for maugre the well known gallantry of the gentleman, the correctness of the lady's conduct is so well determined as to have raised her to the rank she now fills.”

“ O, yes, I have seen that nonsense before/’ said Mr. Maunsel.

“ There is I suppose some foundation for the report,” said O’Donnel, with hesitation.

“ Nay/’ said Mr. Maunsel, smiling: “ I am not permitted to reveal the secrets of the Prison House/’

“ I beg your pardon/'’ said O’Don-nel, hastily ; and the conversation was never after renewed.

The travellers remained but one day in Dublin, at Mr. MaunsePs house, and then set off for the north.

“ The agencies of two large estates, which I possess in Leitrim and Donegal,” said Mr. Maunsel, as they proceeded on their second day’s journey, “ have induced me to purchase a small, but improveable place, at no great distance from either, rather than adopt the taste which generally prevails among the inhabitants of Dublin of all descriptions, of taking a villa in the

neighbourhood of Ballybough, or a lodge in the vicinity of Booterstown, within view of their own town-house chimnies; for every inhabitant of our metropolis, no matter of what rank or circumstances, must have ‘ a little place in the country’ to ‘breathe the fresh air,’ and ‘ be convenient to the salt water for the children.5 The remoteness of my retreat is an immense annoyance to poor Mrs. Maunsel, who had set her heart upon 6 Ruby Lodge/ or Elm Forest,, or Rock Villa ; and cannot bear the sound of Ballynaclmh, the original; name for the town-lands I have purchased. Now Ballynaclush is a respectable farm, with a comfortable house on it, and Ruby Lodge is a little red brick edifice on the Black Rock road ; Elm Forest, half an acre of new plantation; and Rock Villa, a cottage on the sandy beach of Clontarf, confounded among jingles, Jbathing-boxes,. and jaunting cars.”

On the morning of the third clay, the travellers reached Ballynaclush ; and O’Donnel stopping only one night to rest, set off the following morning on an hired horse, to work the liberation of Me. Ilorv. Mr. Maunsel had in vain attempted to detain O’Donnel, by alleging that his presence was unnecessary, and that his own interference by letter would answer every purpose: but feelings would not pause to listen to reason. Having procured, therefore, letters to the chief magistrate, and the jailor of the place, from Mr. Maunsel, stating the circumstances, and offering himself, in conjunction with Colonel O’Donnel, as bail for Me. Rory’s appearance at the approaching Term, O’Donnel departed on this little pilgrimage of affection^ gratitude, and justice.

It was night when he reached the town of***, and consequently too late to transact any business ; but there

was yet time., by the indulgence of the jailor, to whom he presented Mr. MaunsePs letter, to visit Me. Rory. O’Donnel followed a hatchman to the little prison-room where Me. Rory was confined. He was alone, and lying in his clothes on a straw mattrass. At the sudden glare of light, which flashed from the hatchman’s lantern, he covered his dazzled eyes with his hands.

c<: Mc. Rory!’* said O’Donnel, in a tremulous voice.

Me. Rory started up, clasped his hands earnestly, and throwing round a wild look, exclaimed:

“ Jasus preserve me! Did’ntI hear the master’s voice?”

O’Donnel came forward, and Me. Rory with a shout of joy fell at his feet.

O’Donnel was much moved, for Me. Rory was greatly altered, and looked worn and haggard : yet he endeavored to sooih and raise him ; and

informed kim that he had come for the purpose of releasing, and affording him all the atonement in his power for the sufferings and injustice he had undergone on his account. Me. Rory looked, and listened to him with evident incredulity, as if he doubted his own senses. But O’Donnel repeated his assurances, shook him by the hand, and made some observations on his altered appearance ; adding, that change of air would soon restore him to health and spirits. The tears stood in Me. Rory’s eyes ; and after a pause, he said :

“ Troth, and your Honor looks far from well yourself, and mighty thin ! Well, I cannot believe my own eyes—to see you here, Colonel, after all. Did’nt I think. Sir, that you were gone to Germany, forgetting me intirely, or thinking me dead, in respect cf never getting the letter I wrote to you; and that Torney Costello and Cornelius Kelly was carrying the world bafore them,

and would hang me fairly,, or transport me, in regard of having nobody to back me. Colonel. Well, the Lord be praised for his goodness to me, a sinner, in sending you to my relief, Sir: for I am ready to go now. Sir, you see, at a minute’s warning:” and he advanced eagerly to the door. But O'Donnel with great regret informed him, that from the lateness of the hour, he could not have him liberated till the next morning ; but that he would send him a good supper from the inn, to cheer him in the interim. Having informed him of the cause of his letter not having been answered until a day or two before he left England, to come to his relief (which answer was then lying at the post-office), he took his leave, and left the overjoyed Me. Rory to procure him some sustenance, of which, from his wan and emaciated looks, he evidently stood in great need.

The statement made by Mr. Maun-sel in his letters, and the bail of Colonel O’Donnel, were sufficient to procure Me. Rory's liberation ; and O ’Don-nel, according to a promise extorted from.him by Mr. Maunsel, to return with all possible expedition to Ballina-clush, left the town of — next morning, accompanied by Me. Rory, on another hired horse. No trace of his misfortunes now remained on Me. Rory's mind ; his looks alone bore testimony of the privations and confinement he had endured, but his spirits were in a state of intoxication from the sudden transition he had experienced from despair to his best idea of felicity. Though he had little more than the history of his own sensations to give, he contrived to find subjects for his garrulity during the whole way.

Towards evening, as they beheld the setting sun reddening the Bay of Do* negal, and approached the romantically

-situated little town which gives its name to the county. Me. Rory, riding up to his master, asked, in a voice of some emotion : — u Do you know where your Honor is now ?”

O’Donnel sighed, and made no answer. He was returning by another road than that he had taken in going; and he now, for the first time, beheld the ancient castle of his ancestors, still noble in decay; and attesting its former greatness even in its ruins.

“ Why then Fll tell your Honor/’ continued Me. Rory: 65 You are in the Barony of Tyr-Hugh; which was called after your great ancestor, Hugh O’Donnel the Red ;* and there is the fine ancient ould Abbey, Sir, and the cloisters to the fore, still, you see ; which was founded, Sir, by Odo-Roe O’Donneba great saint in the family f ;

* Tyr-IIugh—the Land of Hugh.

+ Founded in 1474.

and just right foment you, Sir, is the great old castle,* and a beautiful fine edifice it is; and there is the hall, Sir, standing to this day.—Och! my blessing on it; for it’s there the real hospitality was, in the ould times. And sure they say,. Sir, the castle if. standing six hundred years and more/*

“\You are a great antiquarian, I perceive. Me. Rory,” said G* Donne], with a faint smile ; while his eyes still rested on objects, which, to his feelings at least, were at once so melancholy and so interesting.

“ O, I am Sir, and so was my mo* ther before me. Not a thing ever happened in the family, from the begin~ nine? to the end of time, but she knew.

O	'

% This beautiful ruin is situated in a fin# view of Donegal Bay. The castle was first built in the twelfth century. It was the strong-hold of the O’Donncls, during the Tirowcn wars in Elizabeth’s day ; and what remains of the original building is in good preservation.

She had fin eShanaos* God rest her; and I mind me now that when we first came over together from County Leitrim, to see your Honor, when you first returned from foreign parts, we passed a day intirely in this town, among the ruins. She shewed me a room, Sir, in the castle, that if all the sands in the bay was heaped in it at night, would be swept clane by morning : and great rustling of silks heard; for they say, a Lady Fionguala O’Don-nel haunts that room to this day. And there is the spot on the side of the Bay, where O’Donnel the Red jumpt off from on board that thieving Spanish ship, which was no Spanish ship at all, Sir. f And Phaidrig/ says

* Shanaos, a sort of genealogical gossip, derived from the word Seanacha, the genealogist or historian, an hereditary office in all great Irish families, who recorded in a kind of poetical stanza: they resembled, in some respects, the French and English heralds of the middle ages.

my mother, c I would'nt wonder if Master Rocly*s heart would swell too big for his breast, when he looks on this place for she called you Master Rody, Colonel, to the day of her death ; troth she did, loving you all as one as myself, who was the only child ever she had, barring my sister; and good right she had to love you, God bless you. Sir, for the great kindness you shewed her all the days of her life ; and often she said so, God rest her ; for it's little ways my poor earnings went in supporting ould father and herself, only for your Honor’s bounty to them : for the best of foster children you were, Sir ; and a great fosterage it would have been for us, if your Honor had been the great Earl of Tir-connel, who lived in the ould times* But if my earnings was small in the ould Abbe's sarvice, sure my work .was light, till I went into th’army

with you, Colonel. But they're all dead now, God rest their souls, and send them a happy judgment. Amen."

The day after O’DonnePs arrival at Mr, Maunsel's, a letter was received,, in answer to one which Mr. Maunsel had written on his arrival in Ireland to Mr. Costello. It ran as follows*

To E, Maunsel, Esq. Ballincttliish.

Sir,

I hasten to reply to your letter of the third ultimo, the contents of which surprized and mortified me not a little; as I find by it that I have been egre-giously imposed upon by Mr. Corney nius Kelly, with respect to the place I undertook to recover for him. His statements on this subject were such as will justify me in your opinion, when I shall have the honor to meet

you personally, and detail to you the whole business. Kelly has within these few days absconded in my debt to some amount. The cottage, therefore, and the little premises belonging to it, are at Colonel CPDonneks disposal ; for I wash my hands of the whole business, and am sorry Ï ever interfered in so paltry a concern.

As to Patrick Me. Rory, he certainly behaved to me in a most improper and disrespectful way ; but as you, Mr. Maunsel, have taken up the business, I will not proceed further against him, but shall give up the prosecution, as you seem to think he has been hardiy dealt with. This, however, I assure you is not the case; but I perceive your goodness has been much imposed on by an ex parte statement.

It is reported here that you are to

be returned bv Lord —— for the bo-%/

rough of-----	;	if	so,	I	beg	leave	to

offer my congratulations and my services, which must always be at your command ; as is,

Sir,

Your most obedient Servant,

Terence Costello.

P. S. There is a watch and some other articles of Patrick Me. Rory's at my house, safe and ready for him whenever he claims them. I am a little surprized at Colonel O’DonnePs return to this country, as I understood he was gone back to France. I take the liberty of inclosing him a little bill for repairs done at the cottage, which is much more comfortable th^ii when he left it.

“ I have not, however, done with you yet, Mr. Terence Costello,” said Mr. Maunsel, after he had read the letter to O’Donnel ; “ nor shall we defray this bill, Colonel, until we see

wiiat repairs nave ueen maue. ± nay toe, because I now conceive myself a party concerned in this mountain hermitage of yourV*

The conversation now turned on the scenic beauties of the Abbé O’Donne Ts retreat ; when, from something which Mr. Maunsel accidentally let Fall, O’Donnel had reason to suppose that he was the person commissioned by his niece to deliver him the mysterious gift which had so long set conjecture at defiance. Mr. Maunsel perceived the mistake he had committed; but O’Donnel, observing his confusion, affected not to have noticed the tendency of his remark,

A bargain between two honest men is soon struck. Q’Donnel asked what he thought the value of his little territory, and Mr. Maunsel willingly gave it. The new proprietor immediately dispatched his servant with orders to have the cottage fitted up as a sport*

YOL. III.	N

U	O ?---------  VV4	±KJ l lüO

tion ; and O’Donnel promised, that when the trial was concluded, he would accompany him thither on his way to Derry. From this port they both meant to sail, Mr. Maunsel in a Liverpool packet, and O'Donnel in an Hamburgh vessel, which he had by accident learnt had put into Derry, and was to return to its own port in about three weeks. O’Donnel wrote to the captain of the vessel to secure his passage, and then gave himself wholly up to examining the papers with which he had furnished Mr. Maunseh and in making such notes as might be of service in conducting the trial.

In the mean time he had the pleasure of learning from Major Mac Car-thy, that Lord Charles was rapidly recovering from his wound ; and on the morning previous to the opening of the assizes, the two gentlemen, after ten days residence at Mr. Maunsel’s

nouse, aajournea to cne county town** where Mr. M. had much business to ' transact. The cause pending between a branch of the family of the O’Don-nels, and the relict of the late Duke of Belmont, for a property of considéra* ble value, had excited much interest and curiosity in the country. The former great possessions of the O’Don-nels in Ulster were known both by tradition and history ; but the person who now sought to establish his claim was descended from a very remote and younger branch. He was by birth an American ; a man advanced in years, who had been instigated to engage in this suit by an Irish attorney, who had urged him to this step more from his own interests than those of his client. When therefore Colonel O'Donnel appeared in the sessions

house of «-------,	to	substantiate	the

claims of an English holder to an Irish property, by proving the right of his

N 3

v/\vii lUlClflUluIb ) VV ilLIl dll lilt/ LU LU III*

stances were detailed by which his uncle had obtained the power of alienating the family inheritance ; and when in the end it became generally understood, that the noble and distinguished looking person who stood forward from a sense of equity as principal evidence, in spite of every national and hereditary prejudice, was himself, by the law of nature, the true heir, and only dispossessed by a passing penal statute long repealed, a general murmur of interest, curiosity, and admiration, ran through the crowded court. The contending parties, the English peeress, the American claimant, were forgotten : the witness became the chief object ot attention, and the whole interest oi the cause was transferred to him. When therefore the suit was concluded, and judgment given in favor of her for whom this witness had come forward, it seemed, by the congratulations of-

fered to 0’Donnel,and theacclamations which followed him from the court, that he had been the victor, and had strugglecfand conquered for himself. Me. Rory had, however, materially lent his assistance to produce this unexpected effect. He had diligently attended in the court, during the whole of the trial: he had followed his master through all his evidence, the counsel through all their pleadings, with the most evident attention ; exhibiting his intense anxiety through the medium of shrugs, gesticulations, hullalors, and ochones; attracting the attention of all, arid exciting the risibility of many within the court. At last he had so . heated his confused brain, and disordered his unregulated imagination, that he became persuaded his master was fighting his own cause, and had actually regained all the ancient possessions of his family. As the town was full of peasantry and of mountaineers, by N 3

whom the name of O’Donnel was still revered, Me. Rory’s communications to many of his old friends and neighbours obtained implicit credence ; and a crowd of persons, led on by Me. Rory, followed O’Donnel to Mr. Maun-seFs lodgings, crying:

“ Long life to you. Colonel O’Don,, nel! long may you reign ! the O’Doa-nel for ever ! Tirconnel aboo.”

They then quietly dispersed, and O’Donnel severely chided Me, Rory for his imprudence and folly, informing him as clearly as he could of the true nature of the case.

“ Why, your Honor,” he replied, much grieved at being undeceived, “ if you have’nt got back your own, sure it’s what you ought to do: have’n.t you every right in life. Sir, to the finest estate in the county, if you had your due, Sir ?”

“ I am weary of refuting this nonsense, Me.Rory,” answeredO’DonneL,

“ winch, without believing, ior tnat is impossible, you persist in asserting. Now, Me. Rory, you are, I dare swear, aware that the O’Donnels wrere not, even ancientlyt the original possessors of the land over which they reigned for centuries, W'hich they won by the sword, and which the sword partly won in turn from them.’*

“ O, I hear tell that, Sir ; and that the Firbolgs were. Sir, th’ouldest Irish of all, and the great Milesian O’Donnels bate the Firbolgs fairly out of the place, only the world will never make me believe, Sir, but that suit you gained for that fine rich young lady, that I seed at Longlands, ought to be for yourself, and will, plase God, some time or other, for sure if the world went right, which itdoes’nt, nor never did, in my mind, your Honor ought to have the best part of the Donegal estate, any way; to say nothing of

N 4

county Leitrim and the Rosses, Sir* in right of your father and grandfather, Sir, that’s barring you’d being born a fey male ^ which you were’nt, for then, surely, your property would have gone by right, arid not by roguery, to that thieving uncle of your’s ; axing your Honor’s pardon for calling him so, Colonel ; or his son, Sir, if he had issue, but he had’nt, nor never will, plase God ! in regard of his being dead these twenty years and more. So that there is’nt a man breathing to stand between you and it^ only the young lady, vVho has no more right to it than Terence Costello, bad luck to him.”

. In this conviction, O’Donnel was for the present obliged to leave Me. Rory, for he perceived that he had not only heated his imagination by intensely pursuing the same subject for two days together, but that he had 'taken a more effectual mode to confuse

i

his head; and when U Donnel good-humouredly hinted his suspicion, he replied :

“O! I see, your Honor; you think I have been looking at somebody drinking: why then, Colonel, "tis yourself knows well it’s little I care for it, Sir, barring when Pm in great grief or in great joy, as I've every right to be now, in respect of your Honor’s great luck this day, though its Lent itself, Sir ; nor would’nt taste a drop if my church had forbid me;,but it did’nt. Long life to the Council of Trent any way, that put the fast on the mate and not on the whiskey/’ *

Although O’Donnel had been seriously annoyed by the effects of Me. Rory’s folly, he was yet touched by the tescimonv of affection which had that morning been evinced to the name of his family. He sighed to think that,

i

* A common Irish saj ir.g.

N £

under other circumstances, he might have claimed by inheritance, might have won by acts of benevolence, the fealty and affections of a people, who, though sometimes ridiculed as uncouth, or calumniated as barbarous, possess that ardourof disposition, which is the true soil of national goodness. Neither prejudiced by his wrongs, nor misled by his imagination, he felt, that in Ireland, as in all nations, what is won by the sword becomes legitimate property; that time sanctions usurpation, and that possessions long maintained, however gotten, are consecrated by the lapse of ages, and held by the best of all tenures, prescriptive right. He was of opinion, that what was forfeited by a violation of the law, was justly forfeited; but to the loss of inheritance, torn from its ancient possessors as the forfeit of an opinion, by the transient tyranny of a temporary penal statute, which brought down heaven to

dimde the earthy breathing its unholy mandate alike in defiance of the law of God and of man, he felt it difficult to submit without repining. But that law was now repealed, and though he was too near the period of its operation, and too deeply involved in its consequences to be quite reconciled to its dispensation, or insensible to its injustice, yet he gave no utterance to vain and unavailing regret: he respected the peace and better order of existing things, and he was well aware that a spirit of accommodation and conciliation in all parties would prove the surest, safest, and speediest means of union and prosper'd ij to all.

CHAPTER 28

Me. Ma un sel was detained by the business of one of his agencies in the town some days after the asizes were over. O’Donnel, both from a feeling of kindness, and from necessity, consented to remain with him ; and they both agreed upon passing the interval between that period and their embarkation, at the cottage on the shores of Lough Swilly. To the whole of this arrangement O’Donnel was obliged to submit, but to his feelings it was equally irksome and oppressive. His spirits were at the lowest ebb—his mind was almost wholly subdued ; a secret suffering preyed upon his heart, whose cause he scarcely acknowledged to himself, for it militated alike against

pride, prudence, and common sense. The sensible pleasantry and playful humour of Mr. Maunsel no longer interested or amused him: miserable, oppressed, and dejected, he passed his mornings in long and fatiguing rambles, without either object or interest, and returned weary and sad, complaining of an insupportable head-ache, and retiring early, not to rest, though to bed.

The day after that on which the suit of the Duchess of Belmont had been so happily concluded, Mr. Maunsel sat down to acquaint her Grace with her victory.

“ By the bye, Colonel/3 he said, “ will you not be the recorder of your own successes? Here, take the pen: you shall write an account of your victory to her Grace yourself.”

“ My victory !” said O’Donnel, rising from his chair, and throwing aside the book.he was reading. .

“ Yes,” said Mr. Maunsel; “ it is

yun wuu Iictvu iciiueicu uui anils Victorious ; we have only fought under your banner: without your assistance, 1 can tell you, the foe would most likely have remained master of the field.”

fC I have observed, Mr. Maunse!/* said G’Donnel, with the air of a man who had not been attending to what was said to him—“ I have observed that you have not mentioned your niece’s name since we have been together.”

Very possibly !J* said Mr. Maun-sel, carelessly:	“	I	have	been	too

deeply occupied with the suit to think of the client; too much interested in saving the property to talk of the proprietress. I love and admire her however very sincerely, though, in most things, she is rather a cut above me, and makes me stare a little : yet, her mind is so right* and her heart so warm, that-----

“ Her heart! ’ interrupted O Don-nel : “ do you think she has a heart ?”

“ Nay,” returned Mr, Maunsel, laughing ; “ that is no easy question to answer. A young widow’s heart is----■”

“ I mean,” again interrupted O’Donne!, eagerty, “ has she any sensibility, for L do not want to inquire into the state of her Grace’s affections?”

He grew confused, and taking up his book, added :

“ Pray go on ; don't let me prevent your writing: you will be late for the post.”

“ No,” said Mr. Maunsel, rising

from the writing-table, and seating

himself bv O’Donnel near the fire. %/

“ 1 have two hours before me yet, and [ do not see why I may not, at this moment, execute a commission from the Duchess to you, which I was about to talk over with her in my letter before I finallv concluded it."

G»

pale.

“ Yes,*' said Mr. Maunsel, taking: a paper from his pocket and presenting it to him : “ in case the Irish property bequeathed to her by her late husband was established her’s by this suit, I was to present you with this deed; if we had failed, I should not have had any thing to offer you but her gratitude and her thanks.”

O’Donnel took the paper with an unsteady hand—opened, and read it. It was a deed of gift, making over to him an estate of one thousand a-year, in the County of Leitrim. The paper fell from his hands, and Mr. Maunsel, either not perceiving, or notchusing to notice his emotion, continued :—

“ Although I cannot always follow my niece’s flights, yet I confess in the present instance I approve the feelings under which she has acted ; a sense of justice, gratitude, and, if you will, a

natural disposition to generosity, have formed the ground-work of this act, which some would deem prodigality; but she is aware that the property you have secured to her ought to have been your own : she condemns the means by which it has eventually become her’s, and she feels for the fate of a brave and gallant gentleman, who .is reduced to live exiled from his own country, because in others only he can find a mode of suitable existence: for the rest, this deed was executed before we left London ; but though I heard you talking of going abroad, I did not mention it to you till I was certain I could do so securely. .As the Duchess of Belmont will, of course, marry, she also wished to make use of her liberty, while she possesses it, in the disposal of this portion of her property. You know I suppose, Colonel O’Donnel, that the estate she has assigned to you

3s that on which your grandfather had raised a mansion-house, at the time when some of the ancient inheritance of your family was granted back to various of its branches by the Court of Claims, appointed to inquire into the forfeitures of the country. The house, though out of repair, is capable of being made a very com* fortabie residence, and, indeed, a few rooms can be made ready for your reception immediately. When I last went there on manorial business, an old man, bending under the weight of years and infirmity, shewed me a room where, he said, the present great Colonel O’Donnel was born, and his father before him : so you see you will not return a stranger to the home of your fathers/'

“ Enough, enough,” said O’Donnel, rising in great emotion, and taking up the deed. “ You say, Mr. Maunsel, you are going to write to the Duchess:

will you have the goodness to inclose a letter from me ?”

“ Certainly,” he replied; <6 and I will leave you to write it.’*

He then quitted the room, and •O’Donnel wrote as follows.

To the Duchess Dowager of Belmont*

Madam,

It has been my good fortune to have rendered you a service by performing an act of common justice, and it has been your Grace's pleasure to cancel the obligation by proffering me a most disproportioned reward. I have been toldr Madam, that your prodigal liberality has been directed to me, not only by what you deem a principle of equity, but by a feeling of compassion ; but while I wholly differ from your Grace in my estimate of rights, and cannot feel the slightest shadow of claim upon your justice, you must allow me to add, that, to be

the object of theDuchess of Belmont’s compassion is the last condition to which I could voluntarily submit myself. No, Madam, while you are thus anxious to render me your debtor, it is my triumph to consider you as mine, for you have only offered to bestow upon me what perhaps you can well spare. I have thrown into your possession all I had on earth to give—my peace of mind and wreck of happiness. Adoring in the proud and sullen secrecy of unrequited devotion, I have long loved nothing better than yourself? save only that honor, which doomed me to silence, and forbad me to hopei oh, surely

•( It were as well to love some bright

Particular star, and think to wed it,”

as to have sought to draw you from the elevated sphere in which I saw you moving, with all the cloudless lustre of that virtue which placed you

there. 1 will not, however, vaunt a self-denial which would have been super-human, had it rested solely upon the disinterestedness of scrupulous honor. Had I traced in your - feelings the slightest reflection of that ardor which consumed mine, I should not, I fear, now stand acquitted in my own esteem. But your Grace's indifference left me no excuse for self-commitment. It was not concealed from me that there was a prospect of your forming a connexion suited to your rank and elevation’; nor that, while you stooped to relieve me, you were about to bless another. And yet, Madam,

u If crooked fortune had not thwartedme,’*

I would not have shrunk from entering the lists with those destined to love you; and warranted in avowing it, would have trusted to time and assi-duity? to cares that win, and vows that

votion, and the perseverance of immutable attachment; with what success, it is now unavailing to calculate. Situated, however, as I am, I would have died the master of my life-wearing secret, rather than reveal myself to you ; but that, bending beneath the weight of your generosity, I would at least jus*-tify to yourself the prodigality of your conduct, by thus convincing you of the true claim, which the object on whom it is lavished has acquired to your notice. Even this wish should not have prevailed, but that I am well aware no result can arise from the avowal ; since, before this letter shall convey it to you, the writer will have bidden an eternal farewell to the realms you inhabit.

Yet should he again be led by sentiment, or by adversity, to return to that dear, still dear land, where he trusts you will dispense protection and

reliefto those over whom you are placed, it will be, Madam, at some far distant day, when he can have nothing to hope, nor you to fear, from the repetition of his avowal; when time shall have dried up the sources of exhausted sensibility, and palsied the energy which gives genius its spring, and passion its vigour: when even you, so lovely and so loved, though never forgotten, shall be but remembered as the brightest vision among the few which memory may reflect upon the cheerless evening of sinking existence; and when of all those finer ties which bind man to life, that only remains, first formed cn entering it—love of country 1 For the weary exile’s latest, lingering hope, when all other hopes are fled, is still to die at home at last.

I am, Madam,

&c. tic.

OT)o;kkel.

U Donnel folded this letter, and inclosing in it the deed, put it into Mr. Maunsel’s hands, who instantly dispatched it with his own; but appeared from his subsequent manner and observations to have no suspicion of its contents, nor its inclosure.

“ There is now an end of your passage in the Hamburgh vessel, I trust/’ be said; u but I shall not let you off your promised visit to our cottage/’

“ I do not mean to be off,” said O’Donnel ; “ for I must at all events *go to Derry.”

To avoid all remonstrance and expostulation on the part of Mr. Maun-sel, O’Donnel meant to conceal from him his fixed intentions till the last moment; and though Mr. Maunsel more than once endeavored to bring him back to the point of his niece’s liberal donation, yet he contrived, with

some ingenuity, to avoid giving a direct answer.

At the time originally appointed, the two gentlemen set off for the shores Of Lough Swilly, in Mr. MaunsePs Curricle. Their servants were to follow them the day after, with their dogs.

Me. Rory had long perceived the alterations of his master^ looks and manners ; and though,, notwithstanding many ingenious and indirect efforts, Le had not been able to discover the cause, he. yet sympathized in the effects; and while he was engaged in packing up O’DonnePs things, in the room with Mr. MaunsePs servant, he uttered so many broken exclamations^ and deep sighs, that his companion, who was similarly engaged, at last asked him :

*s What ails you, man ?”

“ What ails me, Tim, is it? Why, vCvery thing in life ails me; and no wonder ; to think of our being half-way VOL. III.	O

to foreign parts three months ago, and now to see us just going back to the Lough/ as if we never quit the place at all at all ; and to think of the master going, for to come, for to get back his own property for another young lady, that's neither kin nor relation to him : and now that he has fairly put down Torney Costello, and them American O’Donnels, and shewn himself the greatest man in the prowence, any how, to think of his going to quit the country again.—To say nothing, Tim, of the girl I was telling you about, that's far over seas,, and will be further, the cratur, when I am made a foreign Cor-plar, Tim—and the master’s crassness bates the world, Tim ; which is what grieves me most of all.—O, not a word passes the threshold of his lips to me, barring he axes for his hat: and sure in the worst of times he was mighty mild, and no ways crass, God bless him!— And now he is up and dressed at day-

iigui} ut/iuitî i Can get ms codt urusuGQ j and every sighth* he gives, you’d hear, Sir, from this to Cork.”

‘f May be he is in love, Pat?” returned Tim.

tc Troth, and I believe you a’nt much out there,Tim, dear ; for often I thought that same—the devil a bit of me knows With whom though, barring some great lady in England ; but any way, he would’nt have no call to any of them, is he tould me, in regard of Martha, the cratur, without having wherewithal for them; for he’s mighty proud, Tim; ^nd sure a king’s daughter would’nt be too good for him—troth she would’nt. Now did ever you lay your two look-4rig eyes on a finer gentleman,, Tim? Why, boy, you’d think the whole world was looking after him and Bran, the baste! when they walked out together in London streets : myself used to look

* S:ghth—Sigh, o 2

Cil iw im-'Ni Vy 11 U ui	VVIUUUU) i .1 li nsy

turned the corner, God bless them. It's seldom the likes of them was seen in that city any how : and for all that, to think of the master being so cruel un~ am/, and nobody knowing for why.”

Here O'DonnePs voice calling to Me. Rory in a sharp tone put an cud to his digressions; and running down the stairs with a small portmanteau on his shoulder, he cried :

“ Sure I’m coming, Colonel : I am here, close forenent you. Sir, and the things.”

Mr. Maunsel had some business to transact with a gentleman who resided at the little post-town in the neighbourhood of O’DonnePs cottage, which, on arrival, he found would prevent their eating their chicken at the cottage as they had intended, the servants there being prepared for their Reception ; he proposed, therefore, dining with the friend whose business

detained him. To this arrangement, O'Donne!, as far as he was concerned, objected ; he pleaded his eternal headache, low spirits, and utter disinclination to go into the society of strangers, who would call upon his attention, without affording him either distraction or amusement.

Mr. MaunseJ, who seemed to enter fully into the peculiarities of his character, on which he sometimes rallied him, did not press him to remain, but requested him to take on the curricle, and send it back for him. This proposal G’Donnel positively refused. The day had been intensely cold : he had been cramped up in a carriage for many, hours; and as the distance was but a few miles, and the road across the mountains but too well knoxvn to him, he preferred walking. The distraction which bodily exercise produces, and that restless desire of motion which results from the sympathy

o 3

oeuveen me moral ana pnysicai faculties, in the crisis of mental agitation, rendered the mere act of walking almost an enjoyment to one whose mind was goaded by conflicting passions, and harassed by feelings the most tumultuous and unsettled. Not a ray of day-light lingered on the mountains when ODonnel left the town, and pursued his lonely way through paths dreary as his own thoughts. All was wild and gloomy ; and as he advanced towards the rude and desolate shore, the sea blast gushing with a shrieking noise through the interstices of the rocks, and the hoarse murmurs of the distant breakers, added sounds of corresponding wildness to the savage bieekness of the scenery. As he passr ed through the rocky defile which led immediately to the humble residence of his youth, the memory of former times rose vividly upon his mind, tie recalled in a rapid review the several

ed this little ravine, when each time* as he thought, he was never to behold it more. In boyhood, when warm and aspiring, unworn in spirit, and fresh in feeling, he forgot the dark destiny which urged on his wandering steps, and saw only the beacon light of hope which guided him to glory and renown. Again, when his fortunes had fallen with those of an empire, after a short interval of repose* he had left the temporary asylum of its solitudes, to draw, for the first time, his sword under the consecrated shadow of his country’s banner. In a still more mature period of life, he sought, for a third time, among these rocks a shelter from poverty and despair; but rising again superior to the wreck of all his hopes, he had again gone forth to earn subsistence by his sword. Not glory, not renown, were then his objects ; for such dreams

« 4

---X-------J

be bad last left this commemorated spot ; in heartless despondency he now unexpectedly returned to it, with one woe, added to those he had borne away with him in the existing moment of heart-felt anguish, sharper than all the rest. The feeling which woman could awake in his breast, was not the sickly sentiment of romantic fantasy, nor the vapouring extravagance of fierce but short-lived emotion :	it	was	passion,

genuine, unmixed passion, partaking alike of all the imperfections and all the perfections of his nature, to which he would have sacrificed every thing but the well-being of its object, and that honor, dearer still than love itself.

As he approached the cottage, and looked upon its dark outline as it lay half concealed in shadow, he remembered the affectionate smile which so often lingered on the lip of age to vve.l-

come home the truant boy, to hail the long-expected return of the matured man. He was now about to be received by a servant, and that servant not his own. The place itself too, endeared by many recollections, had ' passed into other hands; yet, led by the mechanism of habit, he walked directly to the small door which held immediate communication with the little parlour,as he had formerly done, when no ceremony attended his admittance: the door, however, was not fastened, and when he opened it, he found the room lighted with a brilliancy, partly derived from the contrast with the darkness of all without; yet, O’Donnel saw, or thought he saw, through the rays that dazzled his sight, a woman, seated at a table, engaged in the earnest perusal of a letter: her back was towards him—he paused, amazed by an appearance so unexpeçt-

o 5

ed : the lady turned round her head, with a faint exclamation ; and, rising from her seat, stood before him, pale and agitated, yet smiling. O’Donnel advanced a few steps, started back in breathless wonder, believing the vision that blessed his sight was but the phantom of his own over-wrought imagination ; but the smile which beamed on his gaze was no visionary smile; its image was traced on his brain,, and was never to be forgotten. With a deep inspiration, as if he endeavored to throw off, by a single effort, the load of sensation which oppressed him, he fell at the feet of— the Duchess of Belmont.

There are emotions, which sometimes occur through the languid sameness of life, which no eloquence could depict, which good taste would shrink from attempting, and which, however strongly conceived by the mind, or

pourtrayed by the fancy, become feeble and faded through the coldness of detail.

An hour had elapsed, and within its * fleeting space the histor\r of feelings had been detailed sufficient to have occupied a life. Affections long resisted,, emotions long struggled with, found a ready utterance, and the intoxication of unexpected happiness chased even the memory of the despair to which it had so suddenly succeeded.

O’Donnel was still at the feet of his benefactress, his friend, his mistress, when the tender and passionate woman again resumed the spirited vivacity of the humourous Duchess; and, touching a bell which lay on the table, she exclaimed : cc And now to summon the agents who have

* done my spiriting gently.”'

As she spoke, Mr. and Mrs. Maun-Ael obeyed the signal, to O’Donnel’s

amazement and annoyance, and he hastily endeavoured to rise, but the Duchess, affecting playfully to detain him in his suppliant attitude, exclaimed : “ Aye, come in, good people : it ' is you who must attest to an invidious world that I was not altogether won unsought. There he is you see, after all— ^

£ There lies honor P

And here/1 taking up O’Donners letter, “ here is Honor’s last dying speech and declaration, signed, sealed, and delivered ; by which, 1 trust I should stand acquitted of lez-pruderie In any high court of discretion in Christendom; and, oh!” she added, in a tone of more feeling than gaiety,

** how long did I silently lie in wait for this little testimony which was to tanction a well-founded preference,, and to confirm the hope that such a preference was not unreciprocated !

But for this, the prejudices "of honor, of pride, and decorum, would have carried the victory, and happiness would have been sacrificed on their altar; while the supposed heedless, heartless, Duchess of Belmont, would have gone on to all appearances just the same, laughing at the weaknesses of others, the better to conceal her own : her mind, like the dark mine which gives its lustre to the world, but re-, mains itself wrapt in cold and cheerless gloom ; and her spirit, ever at odds with her feelings, yet disdaining by a single effort to

i’ Race out roften opinion, that had written her down after her seeming.”

i

“ Ï am so little used to happiness/' said O’Donnef throwing himself into a chair, and covering his eyes with his hands :	“	so	little,	that	even now, I

distrust the evidence of my senses.”

44 I thought,” said Mr. Maunseb

“ we snouiu nave surprisea you tnis evening ; but you little suspect that I have been a sort of acting manager in getting up the whole piece from the beginning, particularly the last incident: scene, a cottage—time, evening: for though my niece chose me for her Nor ah, in white dimity, some time back, and threw her secret into my keeping, yet her courage forsook her as we approached the denouement. She talked of my having committed her, and all sorts of delicate distresses? and threatened to throw up the part if I violated the confidence and delicacy of my heroine.”

“ You have, at least,” said the Duchess, laughing, “ violated the unities, and hurried on the catastrophe, without any regard to the laws of the drama.”

“ Because, returned Mr. Maunsel, “ wind and tide will not wait on dramatic laws, nor a Hamburgh mer-

chant-man stop a single clay for the better carrying on of the plot.”

“ Then we will end the play for this evening/’ returned the Duchess, 66 as Moliere does one of his—by calling for supper:,

< La comedie ne puit mieux finir, et Nous ferons bien de demeurer la.”

CHAPTER 29

Early in the month of April, the following article made its appearance in many of the English and Irish papers :

fc Married,, by special licence, at the seat of James Maunsel, Esq. county of Donegal, Roderick O’Donnel) Esq. formerly a Colonel in the French guards, Lieutenant-Colonel of cuirassiers in the Imperial service, and late a Major in the * * * regiment of Irish brigades, to Charlotte, Duchess Dowager of Belmont. Immediately after the ceremony, the bride and bridegroom set off for Tirconnel House, in Leitrim, the former residence of that branch of the ancient Irish family of which Colonel O’Donnel is the representative.

It is a circumstance worth noting for ats singularity, that Colonel O'Don-i.1 el, by his union with the-;relict of the late Duke of Belmont, 'has become re-instated in some part of the ^ast possessions, of his ancestors, forfeited at various periods by the vicissitudes of property incidental to the former unhappy state of Ireland, Within a few miles of the Mansion-House, the horses were taken from the carriage which conveyed Colonel O’Donnel and his noble bride: and Surrounded by a tenantry, whose forefathers had fought under the banner of his illustrious ancestors, the brave descendant of the Chiefs of Tircon-nel returned to the domains of his inheritance.”

The domains surrounding Tirconnel House were not, it is true, those anciently possessed by the ancestors of O’Donnel; they were only granted by the Court of Claims a century back, as

v* KJ * » * V» 4 *	V/ Il	I V' A	v *. -» V V ^

of which they had been deprived in Ulster. But the clans or followers of all the ancient Irish families partook of the fortunes of their chiefs, and transplanted themselves from province to province, as impelled by want, op driven by the sword.

It was not, therefore, without emotion, that CVDonnel beheld the descendants of those who had shared the fate and fortunes of his forefathers ; that he beheld the hall where the harp of Carolan had so^ often reverberated. Nor was it without emotion that he hung once more the sword of O’Don-nel the Red, which he had re-pun* chased, over the mantle-piece of the domestic hearth, while his faithful Irish wolf dog 1 ay at his feet, and his affectionate Irish follower stood proudly by, the happy witness of his prosperity.

Yet still, over these joyous emo-

tions, some feeling et melancholy would at times throw its shadow.

He was willing to owe his best felicity to the hand of love; but he would have wished to have obtained the re-possession of his rights by means more consonant to the spirit of the gentleman, the dignity of the man, and the general interests of his country.

Whatever were the feelings of O’Donne], those of Me. Rory at least were feelings of unqualified delight. In the first transition of his master’s fortunes, he lived in a sort of delirium : his brain was confusion worse confounded, and his own identity lost in that of the God of his idolatry: he neither thought nor cared how far he was to benefit by the prosperity which he witnessed with such lively transport.

Conscience, and a letter from Martha, first awakened him to a sense of his

own individual existence ; for Me. Rory, like most of his countrymen, was rather ardent than constant in his loves; and his susceptible feelings were now recalled to their duty, more through the medium of his easily awakened

V

pity, than his principles of fidelity.

One morning, as O’Donnel was going through the grounds a short time after his marriage, followed by his steward and Bran, he perceived Me. Rory sitting under a tree moaning over a letter:

“ You seem to have received some bad news, Me. Rory/’ said O’DoimeJ as he passed him by.

Me. Rory started on bis legs, thrust the letter into his pockety and folioWr ing his master, said :

“ Is it me, Sir?—Oh, no, Colonel, I have not—no news at all, Sir, to signify, only ould news and he sighed deeply : and when the steward had

concluded some observations he had been making on some land he was about to reclaim, Me. Rory continued : “ Well, Colonel, if 1 had ton Id your Honor this day six months, that the time was no wise distant, but might near, when myself and Bran, and Mr. Muckleroy, the baste ! (that's Bran, Sir, I mane) would have been following your Honor through your lands, where

i

it’s often your father and grandfather left the tract of their feet, God rest them sure, Sir, I'll be bound you’d have called me a natural, troth you would, and no blame to you, Sir; for surely, though I knew there was luck, and great luck, before you, Colonel, the li/ces of this same I never draymed of any how. Well, well, it bates the world fairly, to think of marrying an elegant fine young lady, and mighty pleasant. Sir, troth she is; and no ways high, though a great Duchess, long, life to her, and getting back to your

own real property, that’s the Leitrim estate; and to see the people doating on the very ground you walk, for the sake of the family ;—and the coach, and th* arms, and fine ould ancient red liveries, and the silvered buttons, and the crust on them ; and my own elegant new shuit of blue.—O, murther! I only just wish they were after seeing me go to mass next Sunday, Sir, in England ; or if they saw me, sure, Sir, in our own steward’s room, king of the place, as I may say, and I believe it is not in it, I’d get the turn-out, any how : and Gad be with her that gave me my bit and my sup in the still-room, the cratur Î never a fay-cup I’ll see washed to the day of my death, but I’ll think of her if 1 never see her again, the little* sowl! that’s Martha, Colonel. And sure the Lady’s maid. Sir, Mrs. Martin, who knows all the ladies and gentlemen at Longlands, had a letter from Mr. Willis, Sir, and another inside it, but

not to Mrs. Martin; and she tells me, Sir, that the mistress, that’s the Duchess, is going to send over to London, for one Lawrence Cologan, an Irish boy, and his wife and chilcler, and to make them a lodge-keeper at the gate in the new avenue, near Pat Mullen s meadow. 4 And troth, then/ says I, ‘ Mistress Martin, while your Lady’s hand^s in fordoing agoodturnj and it’s herself that has the notes for it, God bless her; and sign is on her, Colonel: for she has the prayers of the poor, high and low, since she came home to the place, short a time as it is, in regard of ordering them spinning-wheels, Sir, and the male, and the flax. Sir, and the power of good she has done already. And I was saying to Mrs. Martin, that as Lawrence Cologan was coming over, and that as he would’nt answer for a

housemaid, that’s his wife, Sir---”

“ That Martha would. Me. Kory,” observed his master, smiling, and guess-

ing at last at what his Indirect harangue had pointed at, 44 Well, do you and Mrs. Martin consult on the best mode of getting’Martha to Ireland, and I will

O

supply you with the means; and then you shall choose a farm for yourself» and live an independent, though still, I hope, an industrious man.”

Me. Rory continued to follow his master’s steps in silence for some moments ; then, with great difficulty of articulation, he said:

“ I hope I have done nothing to offend your Honor, Sir. Sure, Sir, if I am not Jit to be a waley* to you any longer, 1 might stay in the place, any way, to brush your coals. Colonel, ancj look after your things; for as to a farm, many thanks to your Honor, Siy, for that same, I don’t regard it a straw* in comparisment of being under .one

* Valet.

face, Sir, when I stand behind you at dinner ; and your Honor*9 allowing me to make so bouldas to talk to you. Sir, betimes.’*

<s Well, well, Me. Rory,5’ said Q'Donnel, ff you shall do and be what you please : provided you are happy, I am satisfied : it is among my first wishes to reward your fidelity and affection ; but you are certainly yourself the best judge of the means, and shall therefore dictate them/*

“ I shall j Sir ?—Why, then, your Honor, I am intirely obligated to you, and bound to pray for and serve you, Sir, which I do day and night, God bless you : and Martha and 1 would rather be your own man, Sir, and undertake the capacity of a housemaid, which she is fully equal to; that’s as she tells me herself, Sir : this day I had a letter under her own hand, written vol. hi.	p

V	*	  7	 —

many a prayer she put up for 3^011 and your’s, and well she might 1 And so I'll just step in, Sir, and talk about it to Mrs. Martin. Long life to you.” And Me. Rory was out of sight in a minute.

The intelligence of the Duchess of Belmont’s marriage with Colonel O’Donnel, had no sooner appeared in the English papers., than, among several other letters of congratulation, it produced her Grace the two following.

To the Duchess Dowager of Belmont.

Ma chere Loloile,

Your marriage with our Irish

chief has not the least surprised me. I

foresaw it all from the beginning. It is

at least for him un 1res bon parti, and I

hope you may not be disappointed. I

would advise vou both to settle in Ire-«/

tajJU ror many reasons, anu latre a liuusc in Dublin : a title you know goes a great way there, and a Duchess might carry every thing before her : now here, you know, that sort of thing goes just for nothing at all, if not borne out by fortune, and fashion, and bon-ton, and so forth. Your sudden flight from towo ?n the height of the season, and soou after Lord Charles’s accident, made ua grand sensation : observe, ma belle, you aught to have remained in town till he was declared out of all possible danger* merely for la blenseance. Apropos, to bienscance, I must remark (par parenthèse) that you geniuses neglect it too often, and that your conduct with respect to Lord S. now Marquis of B. was extremely imprudent, though, as it appears, innocent enough essentially; and the Morning Post, I must say, was very favorable to you, to give the thing the turn it did ; but had not the

p 2

I f	v"	v

clandestine wife come forward,, just in the nick of tinae, Lord S—’s attention, and your secret flight, my dear, might have given a very ugly air to the whole thing ; indeed, I cannot yet myself make out the story very clearly, and request you will let me know if the following* statement is correct—thatan Italian lady of good birth, who used to briller in the Duke of Belmont’s societies at Florence, captivated Lord S. when he was in Italy, that she refused his carte-blanche, and he returned to England; that, unable to conquer his passion, and despairing of the old Marquis’s consent to his marrying a foreigner without a shilling, he went to Vienna, where the lady had got a place about the Empress, and married her clandestinely ; that on the news of his father’s illness, he came over to England, and that you, at his entreaties, accepted the mysterious

wife into your house, in gratitude to her, for her kindness to you when you were a poor destitute girl at Florence, and partly out of friendship to Lord S. who lived so much at Belmont House, during the short time you were mistress of it. Now, all this may be true as holy writ, but all we can say is, that “ h

*	t. &	vi,

vrai n est pas toujours le vraisemblable be that as it may, as soon as I saw the thing announced in the papers, 1 left my card at the door of the new Mar- ■ chioness, and I am told that Lord S.

1 mean Lord B. now, has just made the finale that all these roués and old bache. lors par profession are sure to do— married imprudently, and fallen in love with his own wife, who, after all, for what we know, may be his old mistress, and that is more probable still. I saw Lady Llanberis last mght at the Opera, looking in high beauty, and her box, an usual, crowded with men. Lord Charles

p 3

is all but quite recovered, and if the town is to be believed, they are to be married immediately. I should imagine it would bore them both amazingly, but I don’t see how they can well be off. Lord Merton lives behind the scenes at Drury-Lane, and it is supposed he will elevate one of the 44 He-rouies des Coulisses f to the dignity of the peerage—not a chance of the Grand-'■vitIs returning ; and I hear there is not 'a trace left of Lady Florence’s beauty. The twins, however, are flourishing: how excedêe she must be by these little masters, Castor and Pollux. Have you seen Lady Mary Savill’s new novel ? if not, get it by all means. Its title is 44 Despair and rapture, or Contrasted Tassions, by a lady of rank, interspersed Ivith poems, by a friend.” The friend, of eourse, is Mr. Ovid Mussen, her Monsieur Trissotin, her 44 hero d'esprit,^ and the poems are quite as fade as

the author. She has dedicated the work to her husband. The dedication is much admired,, and begins so,

“ To him/3 &c. &c. &c.

I forget the rest ; some people, however, quiz amazingly, as it is pretty generally known that they don’t live

o	%s	*

very well together; and that the poor dear General never read a book in his life, except an almanack or an orderly ; however, it is the fashion to dedicate to one’s husband, or one’s wife ! or some near connexion; for sentiment ^ you know, runs amazingly high just now. After all the trouble I have taken in fitting up the house in Portman-square, and in making out a good society for Charles Glentworlh, he is, I fear, falling fast into his poor dear father’s habits, and will in the end sell his Town house, and live wholly in that tiresome Derbyshire. He is there at present,

p 4

and ice are to follow him in afew'days ; I say we, for of course you have seen my marriage with Mr. Dexter in the papers before now, and most likely our congratulations may pass each other in crossing the channel. J know it is an arrangement that will “faire hausser les Epaules a quelques unes” but I think J may, at this period of time, be allowed to fudge for mvself: and without xliscussiug how far my own feelings have gone in the business, i must say, it was the only effectual means to forward the interests, and call forth the talents of a very clever, sensible, young man ; for though he has been extremely taken up in England, indeed, by persons of the first consideration ; yet Mill he wanted connexion to push him tip the stick; and my brother, for his own sake, must now make an effort for one, too nearly allied to him, not to . interest his pride, as I am sure he soon tyill hisesteem : besides, he is thegreatest:

possible favorite with my stop-son, to whom lie 1ms made himseli extremely useful, from bis intimate knowledge of all sorts of field-sports : I bey go together to fish in May, in South \\ ales.

I should not in the least be surprised if Charles returned him for the Borough ol Ballynogue, which, ent rc-nous, is rather an object with Mr. Dexter. And now, my dear Lolotte, having come to my fourth sheet of note paper, 1 think yon will not complain of the shortness of mf epistle : but 1 assure you, 1 take a great interest in you, and think you have done very wisely to retire from the scene in time; for when flu; first flush of fashion passes over, with respect to you fHirvntûcs ladies, you are left prelty much to yourselves, i envy you the quantity of things you must have to do on a neglected Irish estate.

Adieu, m'amie,

r C)

P. S. I have not mentioned to yon your ci-devant pupils, for they have conducted themselves in such a manner on my marriage with Mr. Dexter,, owing to the sot orgueil of their two stupid husbands, that it is impossible I can ever see them again. Horatia’s husband is, out and out, the greatest* fool I ever knew, notwithstanding his maiden speech, which I am sure was made by his tutor; and Mr. Vandaleur is just what he always was; I cannot say worse: however, they are troth well matched, for a couple of more heartless, brainless young ladies, it would not be easy to find, than their wives; so that, take them altogether, cone cannot well imagine a more lourde assemblage. Thus then, my dear Lo-iolte> deserted by my own children, who can blame me for attaching to me for life, by indissoluble ties, a devoted and disinterested friend like Mr. Dexter,

who must, one day or other, justify my choice by the figure he will make in the world ?

Encore a vous,

. « C.Singleton.

London.

I suppose you have heard that Miss Carlisle has cit last caught poor Sir Gilbert Curson—an immense match in point of circumstances ; but he is, you know, an franc nigaud. However, she is old enough to be his mother—so, ils sont quittes tous deux.

To the Duchess of Belmont.

My dear Duchess,

"You have no idea how extremely amused and delighted 1 was by the account of your marriage with Co-lonei O'Donnel. I assure you I think it is by much the finest thing I have heard for an age; there is something so extremely out of the way in both

your histories and adventures, and both are so clever and so odd :—and then your restoring to him all his vast possessions, and his chieftancy. Good-heavens! what a happy woman yoa must be ! I have no idea of any thing ■finer than being the wife of a chief. Even the wife of a captain of banditti is an interesting situation—but to go on for ever in the same round, in the same eternal quietude, security, and abundance ; to have nothing to expect, or desire, or wish for!—If you had married Colonel O’Donnel in London, and gone on in the general way, I should not have been in the least interested; nor indeed was I, when I suspected you of such designs at Long-lands; but your following him to Ireland—the Duke of Belmont having left you the property that once had been his—in short, it is all a romance* and I wish Mrs. St. Leger would take it up.

[low delighted you must be with

*3	t-

your old castle, mouldering round you ; and your Giant’s Causeways; and lakes and mountains—to be sure, there are mountains enough about my place in Wales; but then one really cannot go on for ever looking at Welsh mountains, and 1 am sick of the very sound.

I have an idea that Ireland is by much the wildest and most interesting country of the world. I thought so of Switzerland till 1 saw it. But I have a presentiment that your emerald isle (good heavens ! what a sweet idea) and the harp being strung an(Hamstrung, and all that kind of thing—but the fact is, if ever I am my own mistress, .1 will go g very and pass a winter with you in your castle—but I tear I never shall. 1 suppose you have heard of my intended marriage with Lord Charles Savill. You know the way the world thinks ■and feels, and makes arrangements for ©ne ; and then vou know one is com-

mitted without knowing the least in the world how, or why, or wherefore ; but there one is plantée. It is really altogether loo tiresome. Lord Charles is certainly a most excellent person, and a man of the very highest fashion and supreme ton. But there is nothing particularly singular or out of the way in that, A woman of fashion marrying a man of fashion happens to be a pretty worn-out story enough. I must confess that 1 believe the truest happiness is to be found in the most unequal matches ; not but I do remember when Lord Charles, in the

life-time of poor dear Lady Charles------

but it is past, and there's an end of it. Apropos, to unequal matches. What think you of our dear Lord S—5s ? What a man that is to be sure ! I am dying to know La hella Italiana, I dare say she is a most delightful person. But in your life, did you ever know or hear of such a thorough ridicule

as Lady Singleton's arrangement— -and lier expecting that, because she brings in a man on a Jiddle-string, and chuses afterwards to marry him, one is to take him up?-—I like that!—-and for no other reason on earth,, that I can see, except that he plays shuttlecock well, as I told her. When she wanted me to have him among my exclusives, I said, “ In the country, at Christmas, it is all very well ; but as one cannot play shuttlecock over a supper-table after the opera, I must beg leave to decline.55 This was rather treating her de haute-en-bas; but it is her interest to keep well with, me, so she took all in good part. But entre nous, she has lost herself amazingly, as these clever bustling women generally do in the end I think, and must be content to be just nothing at all for the rest of her life. Adio cara—I am going to drive Lady Loton to the Park—by the bye, she is by much the most delightful person I

MJU il ■ X UC U1LI llldll lido Id 11L LI 111 gcl-

ting a divorce, and has taken her back ; so you know one goes on with her pretty much the same as before. There is a little shyness among a particular set; but we’11 get over that. Every thing considered, she is more to be pitied than blamed. Poor soul ! her situation is singularly interesting.

Pray make my best recollections to Colonel O’Donnel. I shall expect you will both join some of my festivities at Longlands. Apropos—I have got the most delicious plan from Lady Loton for turning the theatre into a rustic dairy. It is to be lined with Dutch tiles. I shall live in it until it is finished.

Adio, . . .

Adelaide Llanberis.

«

P. S. Some very odd things have come out this season. A Greek gentleman, and by much the most sagatdom

tortoise that ever was heard of. He does ail sorts of things. I am to have

O

them both on Thursday next. What has become of the Irishman, Colonel

0	Dodd el’s servant ? How very amusing he was!

The Duchess of Belmont had just finished this letter, when Me. Rory came into the drawing-room, with a message to her Grace from his master.

“ Me. Rory/’ said the Duchess, 4£ here is a very great lady making inquiries after you.”

“ There is. Madam ! Why then l am intirely obliged to her, my Lady; and

1	hope she is well. Might I make bold, your Grace, just to ax who she is. Madam ?”

44 Lady Llanberis, who took so much,, notice of you at Longlands.”

It is. Madam ? Why then a great lady to be sure she is, though little notice she took of me, mv Lady, from

*	C'	«

that blessed day to this. But I’ll ingage, your Grace, she is heartily glad to hear of our great good luck, for surely the greatest of luck it is—to think of our not being obligated to go to Garmany, Madam, nor to quit the place—and the Colonel getting all his own again, that’s the Leitrim Estates, my Lady—and the high honor of marrying a great lady, and an elegant fine lady—and being as happy as the day is long—and mighty hearty, not all as one as we used to be: and sure, my Lady, what greater could he be, long life to him, except being a parliament man?—and he'll be that surely yet in good time I’ll engage—what would ail him, but be in it? Has'nt he every right to love the country well, being born on the soil, and all belonging to him from the beginning of time, and knowing it well, Madam ? And has'nt he fine learning ? Shew me a gentleman has more in the barony round, or in

the whole country, or the province, or the kingdom itself. And in regard of bravery, does there breathe a braver on the floor of God's creation, or one that served his king or country better* my Lady—that's when he got lave; and would again, plase God, if he was wanting—why would'nt he? And has'nt he now a real and undoubted fine estate, and an illigant line tinnan-tn/, long life to them, that doats on the very socl he treads on ? And shew me a gentleman pays his ministers money with more heart, and helps the clargy besides* Madam ; and the taxes Madam—and sure, if he would’nt put in a good word for us, who would, your Grace—and it's himself that would; and troth* he’d bother them all fairly; for he has that way with him, my Lady* when he spakes from the heart out, thac he would coax the very birds of the trees, so he would, for he is an illigant fine speaker, any way, and has beau-

tiful English ! And so, my Lady, if it was God's will, there is no raysoti in life why he should’nt be a great parliament man, Madam.’5

“None—-at least, that yon and T can see, Me. Rory,” returned the Duchess smiling.

s	O

“ It’s true for you, my Lady,’* returned Me. Rory, bowing himself out— “ In troth, it is.”

NOTES.

Page 151—Among the royal lettersherealluded-to, I am enabled to present the reader with the following from King James. The original is on the Irish Roils, and for the copy I stand obliged to the kindness of Sir W. Betham, Ulster, Kin at Arms.

BY THE KING.

JAMES REX.

Right trusty and well beloved, we greet you well : we have been credibly informed thatllorie O’Donnel, brother to the arch-traitor O’Donncl, lately deceased in Spain, made his humble submission in Ireland to our Lieutenant of that kingdom, and in token of the detestation of his former disloyalties, and firm resolution to continue dutiful and loyal courses hereafter, hath done to us and our Browne, since our Lieutenant received him unto our mercy, many good and acceptable services; and row lately, for true declaration of his loyal heart, the said

itoric natn dutifully presented lnmsclt before our Royal Person, humbly beseeching our princely favor that we would vouchsafe to grant unto him and his heirs our territories and counties of Tyrconnell, in Ulster, the which his late brother (though unworthy), and his father and ancestors, had, for many years past, and have ever in all former rebellion of the O’Neills, lived as loyal subjects to our Crownc, till his unhappy* brother first stained the reputation of their unspotted name, upon this and many the like suits. We have resolved to manifest to all our subjects of that our realm, that out of our princely disposition, we desire their dutiful loyalty and obedient hearts, than in any degree increase of revenue or profit by their dcffeccion, where there appeared evident signes and undoubted expectation of sound loyalty hereafter • and therefore our pleasure is, aud do, will, and require you, that you cause our Jettcrs-patcnt, under the great seal of that our realm, to be made and passed in due form of

* The unhappy brother here alluded (o, was O'Bonnet the Red, kidnapped in his fifteenth year, and persecuted into efforts of self-preservation. The king bears ample testimony to fidelity of the O’Donnels until the time of O’Donnel the Red, who was “ bruised into uudutiful-tiess.'”

law, containing our enectuai gram to tne said Itorio O’Donncl, and the heirs males of his body, with remainders of like estate successively to Cafferey O’Donnel, brother to the said Rorie, and to his cousin, .Donne! Oge Mac Donnel ; O’Donnel of all our territories and countries of Tireconnell, with all the islands, rights, dainaries, advowsons, fishings, duties, and other hereditaments whatsoever, of ancient time justly belonging to the lord thereof (excepting to us, our heirs, and successors, all abbeys, priories, and other spiritual living), reserving also to us, our heirs, and successors, such, and the same rent, and beeves, services, rising out, and duties, as the father of Rorie, or any of his ancestors, lords, or possessors of the country, yielded, or ought to have yielded, to our late dear sister the Queen, by tenor of any letters-patent, or composition with any of his ancestors in the late Queen’s time, and recorded in the council book, or in any of our courts at Dublin, inserting in the said letters-patent ; such further reservations, exceptions, and covenants, for the benefit of our service as you shall find requisite, and included in any former letters-patent or composition, with the lords or chieftains of O’Donnel’s country ; in which our grant, we require you to reserve to us and our heirs, the castle, town, and lands of Balleshenan, and

one inousana acres oi land tnoreunto, nexo about the castle adjoining, with the fishings there, and reserving to us, during our pleasure, liberty to erect forts, which we or our heirs, «hall think expedient for the service of the country, with provisional condition that the castles, lands, services, rents, and duties, which were in the possession of Sir Neal O’Donuei when he lived under Hugh Roe, late O’Don-ncl, and in amity with him, especially Castle-fynen, and all the lands and hereditaments belonging to the same, may be reserved to the free disposition of us and our heirs, to bestow upon Sir Neal O’Donuei, or such other as may deo. serve the same, and their heirs ; and our plca~ snre is, that Rorie O’Donnel do renounce and relinquish all claims, rights, and duties, which he may challenge upon Sir Cahir 0’Dogherty‘s country, O’Connor Sligocs country, and upon an} other subject residing out of the limits of Tyrconnel; and because Rorie O’Donncl shall, by this our gracious favor, receive, as of our bounty and gift, so large a territory as Tire-connel for his inheritance, which may enable him, as oar subject, in the highest degree of honor, we have thought meet to grace and countenance him with the stile and name of Earl of Tyrconnel, requiring you to grant unto him by lers-patent, the name, stile, and honor, of

Earl of Tyrconnell, to hare, and to hold the same to himself and the heirs males of his body, with remainder of like estate to the said Caffery O’Donnel, brother to the said Rorie ; and that the eldest sons and heirs, males apparent, of the said Rorie and Cafferey’s bodies, be created lords barons of Donegall, during the lives of the earls; and our further pleasure is, that the said Rorie shall have a custodiam of all the abbeys, priories, and other spiritual livings, within the said country of Tyrconncl, till we shall be otherwise minded to dispose them, which our princely intention, our pleasure is, shall be effectually accomplished to the said Rorie for his encouragement to continue in his dutiful loyalty ; and these our letters, notwithstanding any insufficiency of words, or omission necessary to have been inserted herein for the explanation of our princely favor, shall be as well to you, our lieutenant or deputy, now being, or either of you, and to any other deputy, or head governor or governors of that our realm, for the time being, and to the chancellor or keeper of our Great Seal of that realm, likewise for the time being, or *o any other officers whom it may appertain sufficient warrant and discharge. Given under our signet at Tottenham, 1% fourth day of S« p* ember 1503, in the first year of our reign of England, France^ tol. in.

and Ireland; and of Scotland the scvcn-and-thirtieth. To our right, trusty, well-beloved cousin and counccllor, the Earl of Devonshire, our Lieutenant of Ireland, and in his absence, to our right, trusty, and well.beloved Sir George Carie, Knight, our deputy there, and to our chancellor of that our kingdom, now being, and to any other deputy governor or governors, chancellor, or keeper of the Great Seal of our Said realm, that hereafter for the time shall be, and to all other our officers and ministers there' (O whom it may appertain.

Me. Swine's gun, p. 202.—Among the rocks hear Sheep-Haven Bay, on the coast of Donegal, is to be seen, or rather heard, the aw fid and curious phenomenon of Me. Swine’s gun.

By dilapidation, or decomposition of part of the rock, time, and the washing of the waves^ have perforated a cave many yards in diameter, which extends about twenty yards into a rock, making part of the mainland, and horizontal with the level of the sea at high and low wateiv marks, or nearly so. This cavity then ascends, and appears, by an aperture at the surface of the rock, not much wider than a large kitchen chimney.'

AY hen the wind blow» duo north, and the

11 UC 12) naît lilj U113 gUil Kfl	OHUib	o	IO

spout shots of sea-water far higher than the eye can reach into the air, with terrific explosion, t© be heard, it is said, from twenty to thirty miles. From its alarming effect on the ears, I should suppose fifty.

Statistical Survey of Donegal*

TITE END.

